Hello YouTube. In this video, I'm going
to examine an argument against external
world skepticism that works from the
idea that there is something morally
questionable about skepticism. Now, if
you have seen my videos before, I'm sure
you're probably uh all too familiar with
skepticism at this point. Um, but uh
just to introduce this a little bit. So
the external world skeptic um the
classic argument for external world
skepticism proceeds by introducing a
skeptical hypothesis. So this is going
to be a hypothesis that is consistent
with all of our experiences um or at
least all of my experiences. The
hypothesis is consistent with all of my
experiences. But uh if that hypothesis
is true almost all of my beliefs about
the world turn out to be false. So for
example, the brain in a vat hypothesis,
maybe I am a brain in a vat being
controlled by some uh evil
neuroscientist.
Uh some super powerful computer is
feeding my brain. Uh you know, all of
the relevant impulses to create the
appearance of an external world. Uh but
of course, I'm just completely deceived.
So the argument goes, if I don't know
that I'm not a brain in a vat, I don't
know that I have hands. I don't know I'm
not a brain in a vat, so I don't know I
have hands. So the the external world
skeptic says, look, in order to have
knowledge of um a claim such as I have
hands,
uh in order to have this kind of
ordinary knowledge, I would need to rule
out these skeptical hypotheses such as
the brain and avat hypothesis. But there
is nothing I can do to rule it out
because my experiences would be
indistinguishable from how they are now.
Even if I were a brain in a vat, I have
no evidence that distinguishes the
common sense worldview that I'm a person
with a human body surrounded by objects
such as tables and chairs from the
skeptical hypothesis that I'm a brain in
a vat. Um, and of course, a brain in a
vat is just one among many skeptical
hypotheses. Um so uh you know the point
is I can't really know anything about
the external world or at least I can't
know very much about it. Um so anyway uh
Chris Rali in his paper is radical doubt
morally wrong presents a moral argument
against skepticism and I think you know
we can we can think about uh two types
of anti-keeptical positions here. So
there's anti-eptical moralism, which is
what Rali argues for, which just says
that it's morally wrong to give up
ordinary beliefs, uh, regardless of the
evidence for those beliefs. Well, maybe
not all ordinary beliefs, but there's
certain ordinary beliefs about the
external world that it's going to be
morally wrong to give up no matter what
the evidence is.
Then there's weak anti-skeepical
moralism, which says that it is morally
permissible to maintain certain ordinary
beliefs regardless of the evidence for
those beliefs.
Uh so this this doesn't say that it's
necessarily wrong to give any of these
beliefs up. It's just it's it's morally
permissible to maintain them. It's okay
to keep believing uh all of the the
things that you that you believed uh
regardless of whether you actually have
evidence for them. Um now this
distinction is not going to really
matter too much going forward, but I
think it's worth keeping in mind that
there are two things that the moralist
might say here. She might say that you
are sort of obligated to keep holding
certain ordinary beliefs or she might
just say look you are permitted morally
permitted to do so. But the basic idea
on both of these views is that even if
the external world skeptic is right that
there is not sufficient evidence to
epistemically justify our beliefs. Well,
you know, we don't have to give them up
or maybe we ought not give them up,
right? Epistemic justification is not
the only kind of justification. The
epistemic point of view is not the only
point of view. Our beliefs are also
guided by moral considerations and
morality weighs heavily in favor of
maintaining certain beliefs even in the
absence of evidence for them.
Um now as Rali notes uh moralists may or
may not endorse skeptical arguments. The
moralist may think that uh skeptical
arguments successfully show that we lack
epistemic justification. But then she
will say those arguments do not in
themselves entail that we ought to
suspend judgment about anything because
they don't address the ethical
dimensions of belief revision. So the
moralist might just say, "Yeah, the
skeptic is right about the about the
about her argument. She's right that
there's no real evidence for external
world beliefs." Um, but you know, so
what, right? That's not the, you know,
it's not just about the evidence. So um,
so there's still work to be done in
order to show that that you should
suspend judgment about the external
world. Or, of course, the moralist might
think that the skeptical arguments fail
in any case. So she might say uh that
the there is epis there is evidence in
favor of our beliefs but even if there
weren't that still wouldn't show that we
ought to give them up. So I mean a
moralist can have either of these views.
Um okay so that's what moralism is. Now
we're going to have a look at some
arguments for moralism. So I want to
begin with an initial a sort of first
moral argument which is not an argument
that Rali gives but I think it's just
worth considering. Um I think it's an
argument that might occur to a lot of
people. So the thought about this first
argument is is this external world
skepticism obviously entails all of what
we might call the local skepticisms.
Um, so by local skepticism I just mean
skepticism about some specific thing. So
like in in philosophy or religion, you
know, an agnostic will claim that we
can't know whether or not God exists. An
agnostic is a skeptic specifically with
respect to God. Now, if I'm an external
world skeptic, I'm going to be a
religious agnostic, right? Because, you
know, God, if she exists, would be
external to me. So external world
skepticism entails skepticism of God,
right? God is just one of these things
that would be part of the external world
and if I can't know anything about the
external world well I can't know whether
God exists right so the the thought is
that there are many types of local
skepticisms that are harmful so think
about for instance skepticism of the
causal link between smoking and cancer
or skepticism about whether the
Holocaust occurred or skepticism of
climate change or skepticism of dietary
recommendations
um see my video uh dietary nihilism for
a somewhat sympathetic presentation of
uh skepticism of dietary
recommendations. But anyway, I'll link
that in the I'll link that in the
comments. Um anyway, the point is
uh skepticis in these cases, the
argument will be made that skepticism in
these specific local instances is
harmful. Uh now, I mean, look, you might
not agree with all of these specific
examples, okay? So maybe you think that
actually it's perfectly reasonable to be
skeptical of you know the current
consensus on climate change or it's
perfectly reasonable to be skeptical
about you know dietary recommendations.
As I said I have a video where I I do
try to present the skepticism of dietary
recommendations and I try to give it a
run for its money. So I I mean you know
you might you might just say well
actually these local skepticisms are all
perfectly fine. These examples are
intended to be merely illustrative.
Okay,
there's bound to be for for most people,
there are bound to be some local
skepticisms that that they will admit
could be harmful. So, let's just say for
the sake of argument that climate change
really is happening and that it really
is caused by human activity, but that
fossil fuel companies are intentionally
spreading misinformation to make people
doubt climate change so that they can
continue polluting unimpeded.
that scenario. In that case, if that's
true, climate skepticism has negative
consequences. And uh you know, and and
and frankly, you're kind of a sucker if
you buy into it, right? Like you have
fallen for the propaganda. Uh you know,
so you know, it's it's bad. You don't
want to do that. You don't want to be a
sucker for the fossil fuel industry or
for anything else for that matter,
right?
So sometimes uh skeptical arguments are
immoral. Sometimes it is immoral to
withhold belief. Um and if you think
that skepticism in any of these local
cases is immoral, well surely it follows
that global skepticism is immoral, you
know, because the I mean if you if
you're just a a skeptic of the external
world in general, then obviously you
have to accept skepticism in all of
these local local cases. A skeptic of
the external world is going to be a
skeptic of the consensus on climate
change. Um, a skeptic of the external
world is going to be a skeptic of the
consensus dietary recommendations,
um, etc. Right? Uh, and isn't that very
nice for the fossil fuel companies?
Isn't that very nice for, you know, the
the the food industry? Right? Um,
so yeah, I mean the thought is look,
you're you're you're just going to be um
easily manipulated into taking actions
and holding beliefs in a way or well not
holding beliefs but like suspending
judgment in a way that's that's harmful
to yourself and others. So the argument
here is fairly simple, right? I mean um
we we're basically saying look premise
one if P entails Q and it is immoral to
hold Q then it is immoral to hold P. Um,
premise two, climate uh, sorry, external
world skepticism entails climate
skepticism, but climate skepticism is
immoral. So, external world skepticism
is immoral. And obviously, you can
substitute for climate skepticism
whatever uh, local skepticism you think
has negative consequences.
Is this argument convincing?
So, a couple of issues with this, I
think. So, one point that is worth
bearing in mind here is that I mean
obviously it's true on paper that
external world skepticism entails these
local skepticisms, but I think that if
we're a bit more careful about,
you know, what exactly these local
skepticisms are saying, it's not
actually obvious that they are entailed
by external world skepticism. So, let's
let me explain. Let's take skepticism
with regard to climate change. The thing
is is that when we're talking about
external world skepticism, we're talking
about somebody who just suspends
judgment about about everything to do
with the external world, right? I mean,
they didn't even really know whether the
external world exists at all. Um, you
know, I mean, obviously one skeptical
hypothesis is just that there is no
external world whatsoever. Uh, and it's,
you know, it's just this is just a
hallucination, a dream, whatever.
There's only my mind. Um but certainly
you know if you're an external world
skeptic um you are not going to hold any
particular beliefs about what is going
on out there or whether there's an out
there at all. When you look at climate
skeptics though by and specifically
you know the the kind of movement that
is you know essentially being promoted
by fossil fuel companies right when you
look at that kind of climate skepticism
they endorse a number of contentious
claims. Indeed the reason why they doubt
the link between burning fossil fuels
and climate change is because of these
background beliefs. it's because of
these background claims that they're
endorsing. So for instance, a climate
skeptic might argue that the data
presented by climate scientists has been
manipulated such as that uh there's that
famous controversy about the uh the
hockey stick graph, right? Where it was
argued that the graph was constructed
out of cherrypicked data. That's a
really contentious claim. I mean like
you know that's uh that's something that
you know if you're an external world
skeptic you're certainly not going to
accept that claim, right? That it was
it's a very much open to debate. Right?
So the point is it's really not clear
that climate skeptics have fewer beliefs
or make fewer assumptions than their
opponents or or indeed that they are in
any sense more skeptical than their
opponents. What they're they're
skeptical spec they're about one
specific thing, right? Which is the link
between burning fossil fuels and climate
change. Um or maybe even you know maybe
not even that. I mean, you know, it
might just be that they are skeptical
about the idea that climate change is
going to be harmful or whatever, but
there there's there's some very specific
points on which, you know, they don't
accept, you know, the current scientific
consensus, but actually what's driving
that is this prior acceptance of a host
of very controversial ideas. Um so again
it is true that external world
skepticism entails skepticism regarding
climate change but the the way that
they've arrived at that has got
absolutely nothing to do with the sort
of modern climate skeptic movement. Um
and of course, you know, I mean, if we
think about it politically, it seems
obvious that um climate skeptics would
want to distance themselves from
external world skeptics because the
modern climate skeptic movement is
trying to uh it it has a kind of
political goal, right? I mean, it's it's
trying to uh lend credibility
um to the idea that we don't really need
to worry about burning fossil fuels. um
you know it's and the goal is is to
resist these regulations on fossil fuel
use. Um, now an external world skeptic
is going to come along and say, "Well,
look, I have no idea whether there are
humans or planets or climates or
anything else like that, right? They
don't have any particular political
goals at all." And it seems like, you
know, to most people, uh, what the
external world skeptic is saying here is
going to look pretty crazy. Um, or if
you think about, you know, debates about
things like, you know, teaching the
controversy in schools, well, that
question doesn't even arise for an
external world skeptic. the external
world skeptic doesn't believe there are
any schools and then even if he were to
grant that there were schools the
external world skeptic would be doubtful
that there's any way of teaching
children or that teaching children would
be a good thing even if he could do it
etc. Um and of course these I think
these same points could be made for any
of these um let's call them you know
potentially harmful local skepticisms is
that if you it's if you just take it as
like well you know I look at the
proposition then yes it in some sense
external world skepticism entails these
things but when you look at the actual
positions that are held by people that
doesn't really look so plausible. Now,
of course, this doesn't entirely resolve
the worry
because if I believe that climate change
is occurring and is caused by human
activity, well, the external world
skeptic suspends judgment about that.
So, the external world skeptic has no
reason to be concerned. Um,
you know, so I mean it's like on the one
hand, they may not be giving any comfort
to, you know, the the climate skeptics,
right? Um, but they're not going to be
helping my side out in any way either.
Uh, the external world skeptic has no
reason to change their behavior to urge
anyone else to change their behavior to
push for more stringent regulations on
fossil fuel use or anything like that.
And, you know, it might be said, look,
well, that's a problem. I mean, in
inaction in the face of these massive
harms is morally bad. Um, so don't we
still have a bit of a problem here?
Okay. So this brings us to the next
issue though with with this general
strategy uh of argument. I think I think
the main limitation of any argument
along the these lines of appealing to
these harmful local skepticisms is well
look the external world skeptic suspends
judgment about whether there's a planet
about whether climate change is
occurring and so on. Uh, and so yeah, I
mean they they they are just not going
to agree that there's any reason to
believe that there's that there's
actually anything to worry about here,
right? Um, I mean, maybe there is, but
they just don't know. Uh, so this moral
argument can only appeal to people who
already reject this kind of skepticism.
So, it's like, yeah, if you reject
external world skepticism, then you can
see that that external world skepticism
might have harmful consequences here,
but it it seems like you're you're
already going to have to have some kind
of independent reason to to reject
external world skepticism in order to in
order to get on board with this moral
argument. So, I mean, to see why this is
an issue, note that this moral argument
against skepticism is really more
general. It's not just a moral argument
against skepticism. It's a moral
argument against disbelieving any
proposition where such disbelief would
have negative consequences if the
proposition in question is actually
true. So turning to the case of climate
change, right? Let's say that Sienna
believes the standard story burning
fossil fuels is causing climate change.
Climate change is going to have all
sorts of negative consequences. Okay. So
from Sienna's point of view, refraining
from agreeing with her has these
negative consequences because it means
okay well if if you don't believe that
uh climate change is occurring or that
you know human activity is causing
climate change then you're not going to
take the appropriate action to regulate
fossil fuel use. Right? That's from
Sienna's point of view. Okay. Well now
imagine Pearl, right? Pearl is a climate
skeptic. Pearl thinks thinks that there
are negative consequences
to refraining from climate skepticism.
Pearl thinks there are negative
consequences to believing the standard
story because Pearl's going to say,
"Well, look, if you believe the standard
story, that has disastrous economic
implications given the cost of giving up
fossil fuels." Um also Pearl will say
you know modern science has been
captured by these political interests
and it's you know it's important for the
sake of you know the our our project of
inquiry into the world and free inquiry
and so on that we resist that and that
we you know like overturn this like you
know you should be doing something to
resolve this. This is a real problem. Um
so from Pearl's point of view refraining
from her brand of climate skepticism has
negative consequences. So it looks like
a moral argument here is going to serve
Pearl just as it well as it serves
Sienna. Um and so again, you know, the
thought is is well, yeah, I mean, if I
if I already believe these things, then
you know, if I already believe this prop
some proposition and I I can then I can
then think, okay, well, refraining from
believing in that proposition is going
to have negative consequences.
in itself that's not really much of an
argument because I'm only going to
accept that if I already believe the
proposition, right? Uh so we'd need some
kind of independent reason to believe
the proposition. Um so the question is
can we do better here? I mean can there
be a moral argument against external
world skepticism that might actually be
compelling to an external world skeptic?
Can there be a moral argument that
doesn't depend on contingent features of
the external world so that you could be
compelled to believe in an external
world even if you start from the
position that you're not really sure
whether there's an external world. Well,
um just before I get to that, I should
note that uh you know I have a Patreon
which you can send me money on or a
PayPal where you can send me money. If
you want to send me money, you can do it
at these places. And I would really
appreciate it because, you know, these
videos take a lot of time and effort.
So, um, anything that you can contribute
to help keep this going is, uh, very
much appreciated. I'd like to keep this
going. I think that this is, uh, you
know, this is worthwhile. Um, but I
mean, you know, you got to pay the
bills, so if you can help out, I'd
appreciate it. Right, let's get back to
uh the moral argument against
skepticism. So, so um I said, you know,
I mean, can can we do better? Can there
be a moral argument against external
world skepticism that might be uh
compelling to an external world skeptic?
And and this is where Chris Rali's
argument comes in.
So, Rali basically states a kind of
trillemma for external world skepticism.
And it's it's it's based on um our sort
of responsibilities when it comes to
loving relationships. So according to
Renali, just to sum it up briefly, he
says that skepticism entails either
giving up beliefs in a way that risks
wronging those we care about, depriving
oneself of the relevant sorts of
relationships, which is a serious
limitation, or continuing with them
anyway, undermining one's authenticity.
Okay, that's the basic idea, but let's
expand on this. So Rali focuses on what
he calls basic aeros and filia beliefs.
So these are I quote those beliefs which
are necessary for the truth and
coherence of more fine grained personal
loving relationship beliefs. For
instance, if you are a parent, you
presumably have a close relationship
with your children and you take it that
you love each other. You care for your
children and your children care for you
and so there's a shared reciprocal
relationship. But all this requires the
belief that your children exist. If your
children don't exist, they wouldn't be
able to hold any particular attitude
towards you. So there would be no
possibility of shared feelings. So the
belief my children exist is therefore
necessary for the coherence of your
other beliefs about your children. In
terms of hinge epistemology, uh the
belief my children exist might be
thought of as a hinge proposition with
respect to interactions with your
children. see my video on hinge
epistemology, which I'll link in the
comments. Anyway, if the external world
skeptic is right, you have no reason to
believe that your children exist. And
that leaves you with three options.
Okay, the first option is given that you
have no reason to believe your children
exist,
you could just give up the belief that
your children love you and so you you
just end the relationship with your
children. If you take this option, uh
you you know you recognize that since
you don't believe your children exist,
you can't believe that a shared
relationship is possible. that you just
end the relationship. That would be a
pretty serious deprivation for obvious
reasons. And of course, notice the point
here is it's a deprivation for you. I
mean, there's also an additional moral
concern that it would be harmful to the
children themselves. But if you're an
external world skeptic, you don't
believe that the that the children
exist. And I mean, even if you do exist,
even if they do exist, you you have no
belief about whether this would help or
harm them, I suppose. But even an
external world skeptic can believe that
if they were to stop relating to their
children, if that sequence of
experiences were to cease, it would be a
serious harm to themselves, you'd be
making yourself much worse off. So this
is bad for you. You don't want to take
this option. Okay. Option number two is
give up the belief that your children
love you, but you just continue relating
to your children as you did before. So
if you take this option although you
recognize that you have to suspend
judgment about whether a shared
relationship is possible you just
continue to uh with the relationship
anyway. Now according to RALI this would
be cruel and hurtful both to yourself
and to your children. And the reason why
is that you are you're lying you're
engaging in a in a lie basically um
you're lying to your children by
maintaining your practical relations
with them. you're acting and perhaps
even speaking as if you believe there to
be a shared relationship, as if you
believe that you love each other. But
this just isn't true. So the idea is
that there are certain interpersonal
beliefs that are, as Renali says,
necessary for the authenticity and
integrity of love and friendship. It is
possible to have friends and loved ones
without holding these interpersonal
beliefs, but this involves you in a
moral failing. Um, and this is because
of the kind of commitments that are part
of a loving relationship. So like let's
say that somebody comes along and starts
bad mouthing your children, spreading
lies about them. Well, the thought is
you owe it to your children to take a
stand against this and to correct the
accusation. But if you're an external
world skeptic, you can't actually
believe that the accusation is false.
For all you know, there's just as much
chance that the accusation is actually
true. So I mean you know I mean you
can't do anything about this or at least
if you did again you would be lying. Um
uh or suppose that somebody says these
sorts of things to you. They say look
your children's lives are not worth
living. Your children don't really love
you etc. Well again you ought to take a
stand and say no their lives are worth
living. But if you're a skeptic, you
don't actually believe that or or you
know, you don't even believe there are
any children there anyway to have lives
that could be worth living or not or not
worth living. Um so again you can't
honestly state either of these things
and as such you failed to meet the basic
commitments of the relationship and by
by continuing this relationship without
uh you know without the right sort of
commitments
this is an immoral attitude and this is
I I think what we could argue here is
that this is a moral issue regardless of
whether your children actually exist
because the point is about maintaining a
relationship ship with this vicious
attitude. You can be judged negatively
for that even if you're just in like an
experience machine or something. Um so
Relli concludes that it is primmaacosy
wrong to lack intimate interpersonal
belief whilst continuing to engage in
intimate interpersonal action. Now,
Relli does raise the potential objection
that all that's really necessary for
participation in loving relationships is
uh what he calls the phenomenology of
care and not any kind of belief or
credence. The idea here is that all
that's really required is well basically
just a matter of your feelings and
feelings are not necessarily responsive
to belief. I mean, consider the person
on on an airplane who's terrified that
it will crash despite knowing that a
crash is extremely unlikely. Um,
so, you know, why shouldn't we just sort
of maintain relationships on the basis
of just, you know, feelings, right? Why
do we have to have beliefs? Rali's
response to this is a little bit obscure
to me. Um he says uh that it's hard to
see how a spouse might be said to
authentically partake in love with her
partner if for example she's not even
remotely convinced that her partner
loves her nor that she loves her
partner. Um but that response just seems
to me to be basically repeating the I
don't know that just seems like a you
know repeating the earlier point. I mean
I I'm not really sure how this actually
addresses the objection but I I suppose
there are I mean there are three worries
that that that I I can think of here
which is
so first of all beliefs and feelings are
not actually so separate. If you suspend
judgment about whether somebody exists
that might well erode the phenomenology
of care. It might erode the feelings. I
mean, fear of flying is not completely
unresponsive to the belief that flying
is in fact perfectly safe. I mean, if
you really believed that the uh that the
plane was highly likely to crash, you'd
probably feel a lot more scared, you
know, like so feelings uh you know, I
mean, there's there's a there is some
sort of connection here between the
feelings and the belief, right? Uh the
second thing is that if you know if you
have these feelings but you you don't
have the belief it looks like you have
to judge the feelings to be irrational
in some sense. I mean when we think
about the plane crash case the person
who's terrified of the plane crash is
being irrational. They ought to change
their feelings. So maybe the same sort
of worry is in this case is that you're
going to be or you maybe ought to judge
epistemically ought to judge your
feelings to be uh irrational. Um there's
another point as well which uh Rali
makes a bit later which is you know he
just he says well consider how the loved
one would feel if they knew your
skeptical doubts right like if you told
your children that you doubt that you
doubted whether they loved you they
would be deeply hurt by your lack of
belief I mean Rali says you know they
they'd sort of say like what kind of
person are you um to think that way
about me um merely saying that you have
the right feelings for them probably
wouldn't allay that concern. So if you
reveal your doubts, you would hurt them
and that's of course bad. If you keep
your doubts to yourself, you're lying,
which is bad. And so the point is is
that if your loved ones do in fact
exist, then they would be hurt by your
lack of belief. And to to maintain this
relationship while still taking that
risk is uh again morally questionable.
and and even the external world skeptic
can admit that it's a risk here because
you know you don't know whether they
exist but they might exist right um so
Rali thinks yeah this the second option
where you
um you you give up the belief that your
children love you but you continue
relating to them as you did before uh
that's morally wrong. All right. So the
third option then
is to continue believing that your
children love you. Um
and that's just it. You you despite
suspending judgment about whether they
exist, you just you just hold you carry
on holding the belief anyway. Um you So
this obviously uh immediate worry here
is um this is just kind of incoherent. I
mean, you're continuing to hold the
belief that they love you even though
you know that they could only love you
if they exist. Um, so you have a
situation where you, you know, you admit
you have no reason to hold the belief,
but you believe it anyway. Um, so
there's a a worry that this is
incoherent. Um, moreover, Relli says
that in on this approach, you're no
longer going to be authentic in your
skeptical doubt. Right? So, so it's
maybe it's going to be a kind of
situation where you you give up your
belief when you're considering the
skeptical arguments, but then you just
hold the belief again when you're
interacting with your children. But then
are you really a skeptic? I mean, this
is essentially Hume's response to
skepticism, right? Hume Hume grants that
the skeptical challenge can't be
overcome. But then he says, well, when
you leave the phil philosophy seminar
room and you start playing billyards
with your friends, all your beliefs
reassert themselves again. Um so you
basically just forget the skeptical
challenge as as Hume said carelessness
and inattention alone afford any remedy.
Um but luckily you know we can have
carelessness and inattention.
So there's I suppose some important way
in which this third option seems to kind
of concede uh Rali's point. The
anti-eptical moralist says that there
that epistemic considerations are not
the only relevant consideration. We're
permitted or maybe even obligated to
maintain certain beliefs even in the
absence of evidence. And on this third
option, you maintain your beliefs. And
why are you maintaining your beliefs?
Well, it looks like this is going to be
driven by just the sort of moral
considerations that Rali is drawing on
here. If you take this third option,
then you're basically agreeing with Rali
when he says, and I quote, "We can
refuse epistemic rationality's demands.
In such a scenario, we can quite easily
be irrational. Fulfilling the
requirements of rationality whilst
primmaacy good are just not worth the
personal sacrifice to one's loving
relationships. Um so
again just to summarize this trilmma
there are three options for the external
world skeptic and all of them are bad.
Uh, option number one is to give up the
belief that your children love you and
so end the relationship with your
children. Option number two is to give
up the belief your children love you but
continue the relationship with your
children. Option number three is
continuing to hold the belief that they
love you despite suspending judgment
about whether they exist. Um, and yes, I
mean the thought is that these are all
bad options.
Okay.
So, Rali um has a nice example of a kind
of local skepticism about testimony that
I think just helps to sort of illustrate
uh the argument here. So, we'll talk a
bit about this. So, um suppose that uh
Verity is an extreme doubter who relies
only on you know her own reasoning
before accepting any claims. I mean
basically she has this attitude of you
know I believe it when I see it and
Verity starts a relationship with Sydney
but because she has this attitude of
I'll believe it when I see it. She can
never accept Sydney's testimony that he
loves her. Now of course she doesn't
outright disbelieve Sydney's testimony.
She doesn't claim that it's false that
Sydney loves her. She holds no belief
either way on the basis of his
testimony. But you know, I mean, maybe
that doesn't matter so much because
look, she can make inferences from his
behavior which she has directly
experienced. She doesn't really need his
stated testimony because she can look at
his actions towards her. But of course,
she can always doubt things a bit
further. And when she considers the
various experiences that she has had
with Sydney, she reasons that maybe she
doesn't remember those experiences
correctly. Maybe her memory is a result
of motivated reasoning. she would very
much like a loving relationship. So she
thinks, look, I'm, you know, this is
something I want to be true. So maybe
I'm just constructing a story for myself
where it seems true. But maybe what's
really going on is that we're just
emotionally dependent on each other. So
he has she has this alternative
hypothesis, right? You know, one
hypothesis is the love hypothesis.
Varity and Sydney both love each other.
But then there's this alternative
hypothesis, the dependence hypothesis,
which is Verity and Sydney are just
emotionally dependent on each other.
It's not really love. It's just
emotional dependency. And Verity can
point out to herself, well, wouldn't my
experiences and memories be just as they
are now, even if it were not really
love, but mere emotional dependence? Of
course, this is similar to the skeptic's
appeal to an alternative possibility,
like the brain in a vat. You know, my
experiences would be indistinguishable
even if I were a brain in a vat. There's
nothing I can do, Verity says to
herself, to rule out this dependence
hypothesis. So, I can't really believe
that we love each other.
So, Verity doesn't believe that Sydney
loves her. Now, if Verity expresses her
doubt, she's going to drive Sydney away.
I mean, it's it's going to hurt Sydney's
feelings for Verity to tell him that she
doubts whether he loves her. Um, it's
going to potentially end the
relationship, which would be a serious
deprivation for Varity. Could Verity
keep her doubts to herself? Well, yes,
she could. But then she's still, you
know, she's doing something questionable
here, missing out because she's, you
know, she's basically lying. She's
hiding from Sydney something that is
actually of crucial relevance to their
relationship. S Verity is is behaving in
a morally questionable way. Regardless
of whether Sydney really exists, I mean,
the point is, if Sydney does exist,
she's lying to him, and lying is is a
problem. um by choosing to pursue these
sorts of skeptical arguments, Verity is
choosing to behave in ways that hurt her
loved ones. Um uh you know, so if it's
possible that her loved ones exist, you
know, and and even as a even as a
skeptic, you should admit that it is
possible they exist, then she shouldn't
be behaving she shouldn't be behaving in
this way. So this kind of case just
helps to sort of illustrate the problem
that the external world skeptic will
find themselves in. There's actually
though what's interesting about this
case is I think there's there's another
moral challenge to skepticism that's
hinted at with this case although Rali
doesn't explicitly state it but I I
think it's just worth pointing out. So
con um Rali says
you know consider what we what we would
think of a person who tries to prey on
Verity's anxieties right so Rali says
like imagine somebody who says to Verity
you know why would anybody love you
right like this person demands that
Verity produce a justification for
thinking that she is worthy of love so
you know the the person says like how
can you rule out that they're faking it
how can you rule out that you even
experience love maybe it's just
emotional dependence Um, and it's not
very hard to put pressure on Verity. And
Rali's point with this example is just,
well, obviously Verity would be better
off ignoring this troll. But there's
another point here as well, which is we
might think, well, you know, it's
unethical to attack Verity's beliefs in
this sort of way. So it looks like we
have a similar trillemma with the
expression of skeptical views. Um, so if
you endorse external world skepticism,
you have one of three options. Option
number one is to refrain from ever
expressing your views to others. Um,
which means giving up on an important
kind of social interaction. After all,
one of the great joys of life is talking
about your views with other people. If
you're the kind of person who has been
uh persuaded by arguments for external
world skepticism, you're probably the
kind of person who likes philosophy and
that means you're the kind of person who
likes talking about stuff with other
people. Um, it's important to exchange
your ideas, right? So, you can hear the
responses and challenges to your views.
And if you just keep all your skeptical
views to yourself, you'll lose out on
this. Again, most people would consider
it to be uh a bit of a disaster if um,
you know, there was nobody else to share
their views with. Um, I don't really get
it to be honest. I'd be happy to just
blow up everyone else in the world. But,
you know, uh, most people would consider
this a disaster. I wouldn't really.
There are there are some people I'd like
to keep around. I don't know like maybe
five or six. Um but uh anyway, uh next
option is to express your skeptical
sentiments, but then this is going to be
outright cruel to other people if those
people do exist. Uh option number three
is to continue to express ordinary
beliefs, in which case you're simply
lying. Um, now of course running this
argument does require us to justify the
claim that expressing skeptical
sentiments about people's relationships
would be cruel or hurtful without
presupposing any contingent features of
human psychology. After all, uh, the
external world skeptic suspends judgment
about how other humans think and feel or
indeed whether there are any humans at
all. So, we'd need an argument to show
that, you know, okay, if humans existed,
creating doubts about intimate
relationships would be morally wrong. I
guess the key is going to be the second
point, right? Which is which is that
there's something cruel about expressing
these skeptical views. Um or it's it's
it's morally wrong to express these
skeptical views. Um e even if you're
suspending judgment about whether there
are other people um because without that
the argument would uh beg the question
um just like the first moral argument
that appeals to local harmful
skepticisms. But anyway, I thought it
was worth just noting that there is
perhaps this other um argument that's
very similar to the argument Rali gave
in terms of setting up a trillemma for
skepticism.
Okay, then let's turn to some
objections. So, first of all, there is
what we might call the stalker
challenge. Uh Rali raises this point in
a footnote.
So, we imagined that Verity is presented
with a skeptical challenge. It seems to
her as though her partner loves her, but
she cannot justifiably believe this
because she can't rule out these
alternative scenarios. The skeptic
attempts to undermine Verity's belief
that she is loved. Moralism instructs
Verity to ignore the skeptic. That's all
fair enough. Well, now consider a
slightly different case. Let's say that
Ian is stalking Barbara and uh he's
convinced that Barbara loves him. But
from our point of view, we can just see
it's very clear that, you know, Barbara
is not interested in Ian at all. Um, but
as Ian sees it, every interaction with
Barbara only indicates that she loves
him, too. I mean, maybe Ian says to
himself, "Oh, well, you know, she's
she's just playing hard to get." So,
here's the challenge, right? Both Verity
and Ian have, I guess, appearances to
them that suggest X loves me, right? Um,
and we want to say in Verarity's case,
it is right for Verity to ignore the
skeptical challenges to X loves me. The
alternative hypothesis on which, despite
the fact that it appears that X loves
me, it's not true that X loves me. It's
right for Verity to ignore these
alternatives. But in Ian's case, it's
clearly not right for him to ignore
these alternatives. Ian should be more
skeptical and he should give up his
belief that Barbara loves him. So the
challenge is well you know like what's
the difference? What's the relevant
difference? If the moral argument if
it's if the moral argument is okay for
Verity, why isn't it okay for Ian? If if
it's okay for Verity to ignore the
skeptic for this reason, why isn't it
okay for Ian to ignore them for this
reason? So in response to this, Reali
distinguishes two types of cases, two
types of things that might be going on
with Ian. In the first type of case, we
can suppose that Ian is aware of
contrary evidence, but basically just
ignores it. So Ian knows that Barbara is
telling him that she's not interested.
And he knows that generally when people
say they're not interested, that just
means that they're not interested. But
Ian is is just ignoring it. He's
ignoring the evidence. And this makes
Ian well irrational. Um and in sense in
a sense it puts him in the position of
the skeptic rather than the anti-keepic
because Ian needs to come up with
implausible scenarios, implausible
alternative hypothesis to explain away
Barbara's protestations. Um and Ian is
clearly blamew worthy in this case. I
mean he's he's ignoring or dismissing
the obvious. Um indeed I suppose in this
case we might doubt whether he really
believes that Barbara loves him um
because he himself recognizes that he
has evidence against his belief but he
finds convoluted ways to dismiss it. Um
so that's the first sort of case. In the
second kind of case, Ian just doesn't
recognize any contrary evidence in the
first place. Everything Barbara does
genuinely seems to Ian to indicate her
interest in him. So when Barbara says
she's not interested, Ian genuinely
interprets that as an expression of love
and he just sees it as more evidence in
favor of the hypothesis that she loves
him. He doesn't need to dismiss the
evidence because he thinks it supports
his beliefs. Now Relli's response in
this case is brief. He just says the
stalker's rationality is compromised by
their delusion. One might not even be
subject to epistemic blame if the
delusion is strong enough. So the
difference in this case seems to be well
Ian is just delusional.
Ian's delusional. Verity is not.
Now, maybe that point about him being
delusional is sufficient to address our
judgments of blameworthiness. Um, maybe
we'd say Ian is blamew worthy in the
first case, but not the second. Uh I I'm
a little unsure how this helps to answer
the challenge however uh that the uh you
know the stalker challenge uh as stated
because it seems to me that the point of
the challenge is how do I from my point
of view tell whether my situation is
analogous to Verit's or to Ian's? I
mean, maybe I can be confident that my
situation is not analogous to Ian in
case one because I can be pretty
confident that I'm not just ignoring any
important evidence. I mean, even that
actually isn't entirely obvious because
a person might, you know, genuinely have
insecurities that lead her to wonder
whether she's doing what Ian is doing,
you know, but but anyway, like let's
just say, okay, case one, fine, right? I
know that I'm not just ignoring
evidence, but what if my situation is
analogous to Ian in case two? I mean,
how do I know that I'm not delusional in
the way that he's delusional? Uh, I
mean, okay, maybe you say Ian isn't
blameworthy in case two, but so what? I
mean, the point is it would be better if
Ian was more critical of his belief that
Barbara loves him. He he should be more
critical, right? Um, that's true in both
cases, in case two and in case one. And
it's not clear that there's, you know,
again, what do I, from my point of view
right now do to to rule out that I'm in
this sort of case? Um, I I'm not really
sure what the answer to that is. Uh, and
notice, incidentally, that, you know, I
mean, look, stalking is is is an extreme
case here, but there are more everyday
examples. So, you know, let's say that
Dia is in a long-term relationship. We
can see that this relationship has
turned sour, but Dillia's invested a
great deal of time and energy into it,
and so she desperately wants it to work.
It's obvious to the rest of us that the
relationship is unsalvageable, but
Dileia is persuaded by anti-eptical
moralism. And so, she goes ahead and
continues believing the relationship is
all good anyway. Um,
what's the how how are we
distinguishing, you know, Verity's case
from Dia's? We want to say Dileia should
be more doubtful about her relationship
and you know how how do we know whether
like how do I know whether my situation
is like Verites or like DAS right that's
the question
okay here's another objection so we saw
that in the trillemma proposed by the
moralist um one option is continuing to
engage in close relationships without
the belief that the other person even
exists s but you just continue with the
relationship anyway. Um and Rali objects
to this that you know it's primmaacosy
wrong to lack intimate interpersonal
belief while continuing to engage in
intimate interpersonal action.
This is what drives the claim that
continuing to engage in those
relationships is morally bad. But should
we accept this moral claim? Well, first
of all, it's worth noting that there are
pretty clearly some popular moral
theories that I think would just reject
this claim. um like utilitarianism.
For the utilitarian, the only
consideration is whether an action would
increase happiness. Engaging in intimate
relationships may well increase
happiness for all the parties concerned,
even if one person happens to lack a
relevant interpersonal belief. Now, it
is also possible that holding the
interpersonal belief would increase
happiness, too. But that just seems to
be a contingent psychological matter.
I'm sure there's some people who, you
know, they could they could just
continue with the relationship without
the relevant belief and it would it
would be fine. It wouldn't it wouldn't
make any difference whether they hold
the belief or not. Um, now it's it's
probably also the case that the
expression of the uh skeptical skeptical
attitude might hurt a loved one's
feelings. I mean, if Verity is in a
relationship with Sydney and Verity
tells Sydney that she doesn't believe he
exists, yeah, that might hurt his
feelings. But Verity could just keep her
skepticism to herself. this perhaps
would involve lying and you know
normally we think lying is morally wrong
but again a utilitarian is not going to
say that there's anything in principle
wrong with lying
um I mean putting aside utilitarianism
maybe the reason why we accept this norm
is just because we assume that certain
interpersonal beliefs can be justified.
We live in a culture that accepts the
common sense framework. You people trust
perception. and they assume there is an
external world. And in that context,
when a person says that they suspend
judgment about whether another person
exists, it's natural to think like, "Oh,
so what? You just see me like I'm a
fictional character or something?" Um,
but I don't know. I mean, how might
people feel if external world skepticism
started being taken more seriously? Um,
well, maybe we would just stop putting
so much weight on, you know, the idea
that like you have to have beliefs uh in
each other's existence. like maybe
belief would just stop mattering so much
if we had that sort of culture. Um, I
mean, look, for what it's worth, I find
skeptical arguments compelling. Uh, and
you know, I wouldn't be remotely
bothered if the people that I love were
to accept skeptical arguments as well.
Um, if the people I loved suspended
judgment about my existence, it just
wouldn't bother me. Um, I'm actually
much more concerned about their actions
and their feelings about what Renali
called uh the phenomenology of care. So
basically the way I see it is I feel a
certain way towards the people I love. I
hope they feel something like the same
way towards me. Of course because as I
said I'm persuaded by these skeptical
arguments. I don't really have any
justification for that. Um I just kind
of hope it right. Um but you know when I
love somebody I I don't uh I don't
demand that they have any particular
beliefs about me or indeed any
particular feelings about me. my love
for a person wouldn't be diminished just
because they don't love me back the same
way that I love them. Um, and you know,
if I discovered that they had doubts
about whether I loved them, um, well, I
wouldn't really feel hurt or betrayed. I
I suppose I would sympathize given my
own inclinations towards skepticism. And
I would feel actually, you know, pretty
good that like, look, despite their
doubts, they've chosen to take a leap of
faith on me anyway. I mean, that's one
way for a skeptic to think about love.
It's like, look, you're both in a state
of ignorance, but you you both take this
leap of faith on each other. Isn't there
something kind of romantic about that? I
mean, it seems like you might be able to
frame that in a romantic way. Uh um
indeed I wonder if the skeptic might be
able to turn the tables on the moralist
here because the moralist is saying look
it's morally wrong to continue a loving
relationship with your children even if
you don't believe your children exist.
This is morally wrong because you'll
have to suspend judgment about whether
for instance the children love you back.
Um but it might be argued well actually
no there's something morally suspect
about making a loving relationship with
one's children dependent on the belief
that those children exist. um you know
that's what's morally wrong. You
shouldn't make your relationships
dependent on having these beliefs which
are, you know, which have like really
shaky evidential grounds for them as
this as demonstrated by the skeptical
arguments. Like especially once you once
you consider the skeptical arguments and
you see uh how, you know, all of this is
just, you know, it's just built on
nothing, right? It's like you shouldn't
make your relationships dependent on
these beliefs. That's morally wrong.
that's a morally wrong thing to do. You
should have a different attitude to your
relationships so that you're not making
them dependent on beliefs that might
just get, you know, washed away um when
you just think through some skeptical
arguments. Um you know, I wonder how how
my mother would have reacted if God had
revealed to her that I don't exist.
She wouldn't have loved me any less is
the answer to that. Um it uh I suppose
you know I mean it might have might have
concerned her to some extent that I
didn't that I don't exist but I mean I
don't think it would have in any way I
don't think it would have changed her
attitude at all actually. Um I similarly
wonder I wonder how you know so I as I
say I I am pretty compelled by the
skeptical arguments and um you know so I
I I do in fact doubt that my mother ever
existed and you know so I I wonder you
know to put her in the position here of
let's say God reveals to my mother that
um you know I I don't believe she exists
or
that I don't even love her. Let's say
God revealed that to my mother. I guess
my guess is that she would say, "Well,
so what? It's it's impossible for my son
to love me in the way that I love him."
And that was, as far as I can tell, her
actual opinion. Um that I could never
really know or feel what she felt for
me. Um I think her attitude would have
been that I'm in a sort of Mary's room
situation with respect to the feelings
she had for me. Um, actually what's
interesting is that from the moralist's
point of view, uh, it seems that there's
actually something morally wrong with my
mother's opinion here, that it it would
it was somehow cruel of my mother to
believe that I could never love her like
she loved me. That just strikes me as
totally absurd. Um, I don't think that
was wrong at all. It seems like it was
actually part of what made her such a
wonderful mom. So, I just don't um, you
know, I don't know. I I I don't have any
inclination to think that I was in any
way being wronged by uh what I'm
guessing my mom would sometimes have
thought, which is that my son is just
never going to know this, you know, this
feeling. Um
okay, so there's that. Uh another
objection um so one question we might
raise here is you know is is the
moralist actually offering an
anti-eptical argument. So the initial
question which led us to external world
skepticism was basically like look what
are we justified in believing and when
we and we're talking here about
epistemic justification right so like
what beliefs actually have evidence in
their favor and and what counts as
evidence anyway and the skeptical
challenge is none of our beliefs are
epistemically justified. Now, if the
moralist is granting that there is no
epistemic justification, it looks like
she has conceded everything that the
skeptic wants. As I noted at the
beginning, moralists do not need to
grant this. But the moral but moralism
doesn't in itself argue for epistemic
justification. Um, even if a moralist
happens to believe that we have
epistemic justification, that's not what
moralism is arguing for, right? like the
moralist is just saying, well, you know,
regardless of whether there's epistemic
justification, you can still hold your
beliefs. Um,
so it's worth considering here like
another another character that I'm I'm
calling the knowledge conservationist,
which is analogous to moral
conservationists in moral error theory.
Moral error theorists hold that all
moral claims are false. Um, I have a
video on moral error theory which I will
link in the comments.
So moral error theorists uh they hold
all moral moral claims are false. Moral
conservationists are error theorists who
recommend continuing to hold moral
beliefs anyway despite recognizing that
those beliefs are false. And again I
have a video on this. It's moral error
theory now what I'll link that in the
comments too. But so a moral
conservationist basically uh what they
try to do is they just try to forget all
of the arguments for error theory. So
it's like yeah when you're talking about
philosophy thinking about metaeththics
you realize that all moral claims are
false but as soon as you go back to
ordinary life you just put those
arguments to one side and you start
believing in morality again and you
start believing that there are moral
truths. Um the moral conservationist
wants to just conserve our moral
practices as they are despite the
falsehood of morality. Similarly, the
knowledge conservationist thinks that
most of our ordinary knowledge claims
are false or at least she suspends
judgment about them. We have no good
epistemic reason to believe that we have
hands and so on. But the knowledge
conservationist doesn't um doesn't,
you know, like give up the uh the their
knowledge claims, right? She just
continues to hold all her ordinary
beliefs and continues to regard those
beliefs as knowledge. And if asked why
she holds this view, she may elaborate
by talking about the negative moral
consequences of skepticism. So, you
know, when she's in the seminar room,
she sees the power of the skeptical
arguments. As soon as she goes back to
ordinary life, she forgets all that
stuff and just takes it that she knows
things. Um, now the moral
conservationist is not giving an
argument against moral error theory. In
in fact, they are moral error theorists.
uh she she argues that we what what
she's arguing is we should believe that
there are moral facts. She doesn't argue
that there are moral facts. Similarly,
the knowledge conservationist, it seems,
is not giving an argument against
external world skepticism. She argues
that we should believe that we have
knowledge, not that we actually have
knowledge. Um,
so it seems that the knowledge
conservationist is not actually an
anti-keepic, right? But the but the
thing is is that moralism is really just
an argument for knowledge
conservationism.
Um,
so is it an argument against skepticism?
That's perhaps questionable. Um, I mean
one answer to this is what Rali calls
encroachment moralism. According to
encroachment moralism, there is not
actually a distinction between epistemic
norms and moral norms. The moral
properties of a belief can affect the
epistemic properties of the belief. So
according to encroachment moralism,
belief in the external world is
epistemically justified because of the
moral argument basically. So so actually
skeptical arguments do fail on their own
terms. So the encroachment moralist
might say for instance that you have
epistemic justification for a belief
just in case you can rule out all of the
relevant alternatives to that belief.
Then skeptical hypotheses such as the
brain and the vat hypothesis are not
relevant alternatives. They have to be
excluded from consideration due to their
disastrous moral consequences. So what
counts as a relevant alternative depends
on moral considerations. Um but again
whether a belief is epistemically
justified is whether you can rule out
all the relevant alternatives and what
counts as a relevant alternative depends
on moral considerations. So the moral
facts are going to influence whether a
belief is epistemically justified.
Um so yeah I mean the thought is look
knowing propositions about the external
world does not require ruling out the
brain and the vat hypothesis. um because
the brain the vat hypothesis is not a
relevant alternative due to its bad
moral consequences. Uh and if you accept
this view then it well I mean you're
you're going to say actually no uh the
skeptical arguments do fail. We do have
epistemic justification. We really do
have knowledge. It's not just that we
should believe that we have knowledge.
It's that we really do have knowledge.
Um anyway I'm um I'm going to end it
there. That's it. That's the end of that
video. So, uh, thanks for watching and
I'll see you next time.