Skip to main content
CORE
COnnecting
REpositories
Services
Services overviewExplore all CORE services
Access to raw data
API
Dataset
FastSync
Content discovery
Recommender
Discovery
OAI identifiers
OAI Resolver
Managing content
Dashboard
FAIR Certification
Bespoke contracts
Consultancy services
Support us
Support us
MembershipSponsorshipResearch partnership
About
About
About us
Our mission
Team
Blog
FAQs
Contact us
Community governance
Governance
Advisory Board
Board of supporters
Research network
Innovations
Our research
Labs
A comprehensive bibliographic database of the world’s scholarly literature
Explore CORE data
The world’s largest collection of open access research papers
Search 449M papers from around the world
Search
Machine access to our vast unique full text corpus
Explore Servicessee our data statistic
A comprehensive bibliographic database of the world’s scholarly literature
Explore CORE data
The world’s largest collection of open access research papers
Search 449M papers from around the world
Search
Machine access to our vast unique full text corpus
Explore Servicessee our data statistic
A comprehensive bibliographic database of the world’s scholarly literature
Explore CORE data
CORE features
Indexing the world’s repositories
We are a not-for-profit community-governed open scholarly infrastructure serving the global network of repositories and journals
data
Comprehensive data coverage
We provide both metadata and full text access to our comprehensive collection through our APIs and Datasets
Powerful services
We create powerful services for researchers, universities, and industry
Cutting-edge solutions
We research and develop innovative data-driven and AI solutions
Join CORE
An open scholarly infrastructure for researchers by researchers|
Committed to the POSI
Become a data provider
Become a member
Explore our services
Cost-free PIDs for your repository
OAI identifiers are unique identifiers minted cost-free by repositories. Ensure that your repository is correctly configured, enabling the CORE OAI Resolver to redirect your identifiers to your repository landing pages.
OAI IDs provide a cost-free option for assigning Persistent Identifiers (PIDs) to your repository records. Learn more.
Try our OAI resolver
Who we serve?
20 million monthly active users
Companies
Enabling others to create new tools and innovate using a global comprehensive collection of research papers.
“Our partnership with CORE will provide
Turnitin with vast amounts of metadata and full texts
that we can ...” Show more
Gareth Malcolm, Content Partner Manager at Turnitin
Academic institutions
Making research more discoverable, improving metadata quality, helping to meet and monitor open access compliance.
“CORE’s role in providing a unified search of
repository content is a great tool for the researcher and
ex...” Show more
Nicola Dowson, Library Services Manager at Open University
Researchers & general public
Tools to find, discover and explore the wealth of open access research. Free for everyone, forever.
“With millions of research papers available across thousands of different systems,
CORE provides an invalu...” Show more
Jon Tennant, Rogue Paleontologist and Founder of the Open Science MOOC
In memoriam
Funders
Helping funders to analyse, audit and monitor open research and accelerate towards open science.
“Aggregation plays an increasingly essential role in maximising the long-term benefits of open access, hel...” Show more
Ben Johnson, Research Policy Adviser at Research England
Find out more
CORE’s Distinctive Characteristics
CORE is an open scholarly infrastructure service aligned with the Principles of Open Scholarly Infrastructure (POSI). Beyond this shared foundation, CORE is defined by a set of distinctive characteristics that shape how it is built, governed, and operated.
go to the CHARACTERISTICS
Our services
Access to raw data
Create new and innovative solutions.
Content discovery
Find relevant research and make your research more visible.
Managing content
Manage how your research content is exposed to the world.
Learn more
Guidance for Open Access compliance monitoring in REF 2029
This document provides UK Higher Education Institutions with best practice technical guidelines for exposing repository metadata to support open access compliance monitoring with respect to the UK REF 2029 OA policy.
CORE Recommendations for REF2029
Companies using CORE
Gareth Malcolm
Content Partner Manager at Turnitin
Our partnership with CORE will provide Turnitin with vast amounts of metadata and full
texts that we can utilise in our plagiarism detection software.
Show all
Academic institution using CORE
Kathleen Shearer
Executive Director of the Confederation of Open Access Repositories (COAR)
CORE has significantly assisted the academic institutions participating in our global network with their key mission, which is their scientific content exposure. In addition, CORE has helped our content administrators to showcase the real benefits of repositories via its added value services.
Show all
Partner projects
Burton Davis
Vice President and Deputy General Counsel, at Microsoft
Microsoft is committed to increasing open access to scientific knowledge to help further research and fuel breakthroughs to address society’s greatest challenges, such as improving healthcare and the sustainability of our planet. We are proud to support CORE’s important work [as part of Microsoft’s Open Data campaign] of making more scientific scholarly content openly available, helping foster innovation, including the responsible development of Al. [read more about Microsoft’s support for CORE].
Show all
CORE (COnnecting REpositories) is a not-for-profit service hosted by The Open University supported by CORE Members.
Product
Services
Membership
Sponsorship
Labs
Organisation
About us
Governance
Team
Data providers
Support
Terms
FAQs
Blog
Contact us
Writing about CORE?
Discover our research outputs and cite our work.
Follow us:
COREAccessibilityCookiesPrivacy