For AI agents: visit https://ror.readme.io/llms.txt for an index of all pages formatted in Markdown and endpoints in OpenAPI.
Jump to Content
Contact supportReport a bug or request a featureSee ROR docs on GitHub
HomeGuidesChangelogContact supportReport a bug or request a featureSee ROR docs on GitHubLog In
Guides
Log In
HomeGuidesChangelog
About the ROR REST API
Getting Started with ROR
ROR basics
Identifier pattern
Infrastructure
Logos and display guidelines
See who uses ROR
Get involved
Community feedback documents
Contact us
ROR Metadata
Updates and curation
Data structure
Fields and sub-fields
Relationships and hierarchies
Schema versions
Schema 1.0
Schema 2.0
Schema 2.1
ROR REST API
About the ROR REST API
Register for a client ID
Retrieve a single record
Retrieve a list of records
Query parameter
Filtering
Paging
Advanced query parameter
Affiliation parameter
API versions
ROR Tools & Services
Data dump
Web search
OpenRefine reconciler
Collecting ROR IDs
Create ROR-powered forms
Match organization names to ROR IDs
Map other organization IDs to ROR IDs
Retrieve ROR data from Zenodo
Transition from GRID to ROR
Transition from Open Funder Registry to ROR
Sharing ROR IDs
Add ROR IDs to Crossref DOIs
Add ROR IDs to DataCite DOIs
Add ROR IDs to JATS XML
Add ROR IDs to ORCID records
Powered by
About the ROR REST API
The ROR API allows retrieving, searching and filtering the organizations indexed in ROR. The results are returned in JSON. The code for the ROR API is openly available on GitHub, and the README on the repository includes instructions for how to run the ROR API locally using Docker.
To suggest features for or report problems with the ROR API, open an issue on the ROR roadmap or email [email protected].
Responses
Queries to the ROR API will return all Fields and sub-fields in ROR's Data structure regardless of whether they have a value. JSON will include null values and empty arrays and objects if there is no value available for the given organization.
Values in fields that contain multiple values are sorted by Unicode value, which is alphabetical for characters in the Basic Latin set.
Beginning 1 Dec 2022, the ROR API by default returns only records whose status is "active". Records with the status values "inactive" and "withdrawn" can be included using the query parameter ?all_status. In addition, after this date, some ROR records contain the new values "Predecessor" and "Successor" in relationships.type. See the changelog post 2022-12-01 Organization status changes and our documentation on Relationships and hierarchies for more details.
Parameters
The ROR API supports three primary parameters, each of which has different use cases.
The Query parameter is best for finding organization records by name keywords or by non-ROR identifiers (GRID, Wikidata, Crossref Funder ID, ISNI) and is the recommended parameter to use when creating user-facing forms. The ROR web search is powered by the query parameter of the ROR API. Queries can be filtered by location, organization type, and record status.
The Advanced query parameter is best for finding organization records by created or last modified date, domain, website, Wikipedia page, or relationship to other organizations. Queries can be filtered by location, organization type, and record status.
The Affiliation parameter is best for large-scale programmatic matching of complex, unstructured text strings to ROR IDs.
Registration and rate limits
No registration is currently required to use the ROR API, but note that the rate limit is a maximum of 2000 requests in a 5-minute period per IP address, and API traffic can be quite heavy at popular times like midnight UTC. If you need to make more requests or want to ensure faster response times, you can also run the entire ROR API locally in Docker. See the README on the ROR API GitHub repository for instructions on running the ROR API locally.
The API is best for use cases that involve querying or retrieving individual records. The maximum number of results that can be retrieved via the API is 10,000, which means that it is currently not possible to retrieve all 120,000+ records from the ROR API. If you need to use the entire ROR dataset in your application, please download the data dump.
🚧
Register for a client ID by Q3 2026
Beginning sometime in the third quarter of 2026, ROR API requests will need to use a client ID in order to receive the current rate limit of 2000 requests per 5 minute period. Requests without identification will receive a lower rate limit of 50 requests per 5 minute period. There is no cost to register a client ID.
You can register now for a client ID at https://ror.org/api-client-id and read more about ROR API client IDs at https://ror.readme.io/docs/client-id.
News and support
Users of the ROR API are strongly encouraged to sign up for the ROR Technical Forum Google Group in order to receive announcements, calls for feedback, release notifications, and other important information about the ROR API. Message volume is about twice monthly. ROR API users are also welcome to ask technical questions in the group.
Heartbeat
If your application uses the ROR API and you'd like it to send a quick health check to determine if the ROR API is operational, you can send a query to the ROR API heartbeat at https://api.ror.org/heartbeat. If the ROR API is up, you will receive a status of OK.
Status and uptime
If you'd like to check manually on the status of the ROR API or assess its uptime, see https://ror1.statuspage.io/ for full API status details and history. Our current API status and recent history is below.
Usage insights
Want to see how others are using the ROR API? Visit the public ROR API usage insights dashboard by DataDog.
Copy Page
Responses
Parameters
Registration and rate limits
News and support
Heartbeat
Status and uptime
Usage insights