The Born rule is one of the core
features of quantum mechanics. It tells
us the probability to measure a state
given that another one was prepared. But
this gives the mistaken impression that
quantum mechanics is about measurement,
and it's not. It's about preparation.
About the unavoidable variability,
uncertainty that is intrinsic in every
preparation. So, we're going to show
that the Born rule is equivalent to
characterizing the entropy, the
variability, of preparation. That is,
the probability of measuring one state
given that another one was prepared can
be derived from the entropy of an equal
mixture of those two states. The Born
rule is entropy, and entropy is the Born
rule.
Orthogonal states are mutually exclusive
states, and those that can be prepared
under the same conditions. And there are
a lot of things that I could say, but I
have to keep the video short because
I've been busy with conferences,
workshops, and summer school, so I
didn't really have the time to prepare a
longer video. So, we'll just see the
Born rule geometrically, the entropy
geometrically, and how one can be
derived from another geometrically. Yes,
we're going to use Euclidean geometry
and trigonometry, what you learned in
your first year of high school. Is Is Is
that when people learn Anyway, no
complex numbers, no Hilbert spaces. So,
here is the Born rule. The probability
of measuring psi given phi is given by
the inner product of psi phi, phi psi
divided by the norm of the two vectors.
And if the two vectors are normalized,
then you just have the square of the
inner product. Now, this expression
doesn't tell you much, so let's see
geometrically what happens. In case of a
two-state system, all pure states are on
the surface of the Bloch sphere. And
since we're always considering two
states, we can just look at a section of
the block sphere, a circle that contains
psi, phi, and the center of the sphere.
The probability of measuring psi given
phi is simply the vertical height, the
vertical distance of phi because if phi
were here, we would have to be zero, and
if phi were up, we would have to be one.
And the probability is going to be a
linear function, so all the states at
the same height will have the same
probability. So, we can just get phi,
project it on the vertical axis, and
look at this distance. Now, this
probability has to be normalized by the
diameter, which would be two. So, really
the probability is the distance between
C and psi perp
divided by the distance between psi and
psi perp. So, technically, this distance
is twice the probability, but I think I
you know, intuitively, this distance is
probability. It's just a normalization,
and so I will use P here even if the
distance is 2P. And then when you when
you do the calculation, we make it
precise. Psi psi perp is a diameter, so
it would be length two. And psi perp C
is one unit of radius times the cosine
of theta because this is a right
triangle, and this is the hypotenuse, so
that which is the radius, which is going
to be one. So, the probability of
measuring psi given phi is simply one
plus the cosine of the angle divided by
two. And if you remember your
trigonometry, this is exactly the cosine
square of theta over two.
Actually, you know why this works? We
can also see geometrically why this
works. So, we have psi, phi, psi perp,
and this makes a right triangle. And the
angle here is simply half the angle of
theta. So, this is psi over two.
Now, this is a right triangle. So, this
side is the hypotenuse psi psi perp
multiplied by the cosine of theta over
two. Here it is.
But also this one is a right triangle.
So, the distance between C and psi perp,
it's since it's a side, is just the
hypotenuse multiplied by the cosine of
theta over two. And here it is. And so,
we can now
substitute this expression here, and we
just have psi psi perp cosine square of
theta over two. Because you see, we are
projecting twice around the same angle.
That's why you get this cosine square.
So, now the ratio between a C and psi
perp and psi psi perp, that's exactly
the Bohr rule. And so, you just have
cosine square over two. Okay, so the
main message here is that the Bohr rule
is an invertible function of the angle.
So, if you know the angle on the Bloch
sphere between psi and phi, you can get
the Bohr rule. And if you know the Bohr
rule, you know this height, you are
going to be able to get to the angle.
So, there is a one-to-one map between
the probability of measurement and the
angle on the Bloch sphere. That's the
important geometrical fact. Okay. So,
now let's move on to the von Neumann
entropy. We have a mixed state, which is
really a classical probability
distribution over different preparation.
And we are going to have the entropy,
which is going to be given by the von
Neumann entropy, which is minus the
trace of rho log rho. And if you don't
know what this is, doesn't really matter
so much because at the end of the day,
what matters are the the coefficients
that you would put on
a set of states that are orthogonal to
each other. And and according to those
coefficients, you get just get the
standard expression, which is minus P
log P. So again, this is not telling us
much, so let's go to the block sphere to
get a little bit of a geometrical idea.
So B1 and B2 are our two orthogonal
states of which rho is a mixture of, not
a superposition, but a mixture. And a
mixture is just on the line that
connects the two.
So this would be rho. The distance
between rho
and B2, again normalized, would be P1,
and the distance between rho and B1 is
P2. Again, this is not a typo. The
things are inverted because if you
imagine that P1 is one, we go all the
way here and we get B1. And if P2 is
one, then we go all the way down and we
get B2. So this is a little bit
confusing that the two things are
inverted, but that's how it is. And
again, recall that technically this
distance is two, so we are we are
normalizing, so this should be two times
the probability, but again, the
geometrical intuition should be that
this is P1 and this is P2. And so you
have this expression in terms of this.
Now we can do better because like
before, we can note that P1 is really 1
+ R / 2. So P1 is just 1 + the distance
between
the center of the block sphere and rho /
2, and P2 is 1
the distance / 2. So you have this
expression. And now you have an
invertible relationship between the
distance from the center of the sphere
and the entropy. So, if you are at the
center of the sphere, your R is zero,
you have one at the maximum entropy that
you can have in a two-state system, and
as you go further out, your entropy
decreases and it gets to zero when you
are on a pure state. So, you can imagine
that the entropy sort of gives you
concentric shells, and the more you get
inside, the more the state is mixed, the
more the entropy is high.
Okay? So, again, geometrically the
important thing is that the entropy is
an invariable function of the radial
distance in the Bloch ball. If I tell
you the entropy, I'm telling you this R,
and if you give me this R, I can tell
you the entropy. It's the same thing.
And now, the little bit of intuition
that is going to link the two.
Suppose that we have psi and phi,
and we have an equal mixture rho of the
two. And again, it's an equal mixture
rho means that it's in between these
two, and it's exactly in the middle.
Now, this rho will have a distance with
its origin.
And if you can animate by yourself in
your head, if you imagine that phi goes
towards psi, then rho is going going to
go toward the outside. And if the angle
instead increases, rho is going to go
towards O. So, the radial distance of
rho is an invariable function of the
angle between psi and phi on the Bloch
sphere.
But if you can go between this R and
this angle, and we saw that the angle
was one-to-one to the Born rule, and the
the distance to the center is one-to-one
to the entropy, then we can go one to
one from the probability of the born
rule to the entropy. And this is why we
should describe to understand things
more concretely, more geometrically,
because then we can see all these
intuitions and this is exactly what
reverse physics is all about, being able
to see this connection. Okay. So, there
is this relationship. Let's find it. So,
R is this segment which is O row. But,
this here is a right triangle. So, O row
is simply the cosine of the angle
between B1 and psi.
But, the angle between B1 and psi is
half of the angle between phi and psi.
So, we have that R is the cosine of the
angle theta between the two states
divided by two.
But, this, as we saw before, is just the
square root of the born rule.
So, the relationship between R and the
born rule is actually quite simple. And
therefore, our entropy is just going to
be the same function that we had before.
Instead of R, we just have the square
root of the born rule. And therefore, we
have the one-to-one map between the
square root of the born rule and the
entropy. And so, we can go back and
forth. So again, this relationship is
very simple. So, we should see why this
relationship exists geometrically. Why
do we have that? Okay. So again, let's
review all the elements here. We have
our block ball. We have O at the center
of the block ball. We have the two
states psi and phi. And we have the
state row which is in between the two,
which is the equal mixture. And then we
have this that it's R, the distance of
rho from the center of the Bloch sphere.
Now, to get to the Bohr rule, we have to
connect psi with psi perp, project phi
onto that line, and then this distance
over two is going to be the Bohr rule.
The Bohr rule is this distance between
psi
perp and the
projection of phi. Okay? So, we have to
understand the relationship between this
segment and this segment divided by two.
Okay, so, note that psi perp phi psi is
a right triangle. So, we have some
Pythagorean action going on. So, we have
that this square plus this square is
equal to this square. But, since this is
the projection, what actually happened
is that this square is equal to this
rectangle. So, psi perp phi square is
equal to psi perp c times this side,
which is just psi perp psi. So, we have
this relationship.
Now, another thing that we note is phi
psi is twice the distance of rho phi,
because we said that rho is in the
middle of the two.
Also, psi perp psi is twice the distance
between O and psi, because this is the
diameter and this is just the radius.
Okay, so, this triangle here is similar
to this triangle here.
Which means that this distance here, psi
perp phi, is twice the distance of O
rho.
So, now we can use this expression,
substitute it here, and divide it by a
fourth, and we basically have this
relationship. The square that we have on
O row is equal to this rectangle, and
one side is just a radius, so it's just
one, and this other side is just the psi
perp c divided by two.
So, we have that O row square is equal
psi perp c divided by two. But, O row is
R, and psi perp c divided by two is the
Bohr rule.
So, R is equal the square root of the
probability of measuring psi given phi.
And again, you can see geometrically
here.
So, what I would recommend is that you
kind of
stop and try to reconstruct all these
things by yourself, so that you can get
a sort of a better understanding of the
geometry of these things, because it's
really nice and beautiful, and it sort
of helps demystify a lot of these
expressions in quantum mechanics. And
so, we have seen that the Bohr rule is
equivalent to the entropy in the sense
that given two states, I can give you
the Bohr rule between the two, and you
can reconstruct the entropy between the
two, or I can give you the entropy of
the mixture of the two, and you
reconstruct the Bohr rule. It's the same
thing. Mathematically and conceptually,
they play the same role, they have the
same informational content.
So, why is this interesting? First,
because having more ways to understand
the same things gives you more
understanding.
Second, at least to me, seeing the
geometry makes me understand a lot more
why things have to be in a certain way.
But, there is one more conceptual
reason.
Since the Bohr rule is a relationship
between a preparation and a measurement,
it is technically a relationship between
two different spaces, the space of
initial states and the space of final
states. But, some measurements are
destructive, so you don't really have a
well-defined space for final states in
general.
The inner product instead is technically
defined on elements of a single space.
So, conceptually, there is a little bit
of a disconnect there.
But, there is no such problem for the
entropy. The entropy is the variability
of the preparation. The mixture of two
states is defined at equal time on the
same space, on the space of preparation.
This also meshes well with a lot of
other results in reverse physics, like
that the Schrödinger equation is exactly
the evolution that conserves the
entropy. So, all in all, once you get
used to it, there are other advantages,
which you can learn if you follow our
research on the assumptions of physics
through this channel, our other channel,
our website assumptionsofphysics.org,
and all the material that we put there.
I hope to see you next time.