So uh I'm going to talk about my recent
paper on geometric framework for
biological evolution. Um and uh I do
realize that there's some many things
there are not commonly used by
biologists. So I'll try to go slowly and
uh if if something doesn't make sense
just you know don't wait until the end
just interrupt me and I'll try to
clarify. Um so many things that may
sound complex are not really complex and
it's always possible to explain things
uh on on on a on a level that would be
understandable. So um now what this is
not going to be about although you know
I would ideally want to stop start start
with that but it's this talk not going
to be you know introducing all the
machinery that you know I use in what I
call neural physics uh which so far been
applied to physical phenomena and
complex phenomena biological phenomena
I'm not going to do that um but some of
the tools I will lose and uh and when I
do again uh there is a warning uh for
you. Don't don't get afraid right away
if there is something isn't
um something that isn't familiar to you.
It just you know I'll spell it out. Um
now it's not going to be again on on the
multi-level learning which is I think
very much exciting part and I I heard
you gave it uh some information on that
as well. So there's uh certainly a lot
of experiments can can be done to
clarify
what is it sitting in in this way. You
know we wrote a couple of papers about
this. There was some uh more than a
couple of papers about that. But again
this isn't going to talk about
multi-level. I'll just pick a given
level and um tell tell what's happening
there. What's what kind of you know what
is the right u language to discuss
things there. Um and and why why we need
it? Why do we you know some you know
people ask why why would you want to
complicate things um why do you need to
and I'll try to justify why this is the
right language and then now this the
third part is I'm particularly
interested with regards to your lab
because you guys are to try to um you
know trying to define and understand how
agents work and what the agents are um I
think there's a lot of again exciting
work that was done theoretical mostly on
my side trying to understand how to what
are the principle behind the the engines
and by agents uh they can be on
different levels. So you know in this
talk the agent will be a populations of
a of of organisms. So this entire
population will be uh one agent and
we'll try to see what are the
appropriate tools to study how the
population evolves. Um and this talk is
not going to be uh you know connecting
other other uh levels um in this grand
multi-disiplinary program of uh you know
modeling as much as we can using the the
neural physics using the learning
dynamics and then you know starting from
elementary degrees of freedom uh like
electrons all the way to um I don't know
social phenomena and um biological
evolutionary phenomenon essentially. So,
so uh it will be a rather narrow talk
but um with enough material to to
uh argue that that this may be the right
tools to use if we only concentrate on
biological evolution. So that's kind of
the the pitch here.
>> Okay. So, so uh now from the biologist's
perspective the um um my motivation
would be is you know if you look at the
standard classical evolution theory
there is something that uh we physicists
love and understand why we need it
called uh coordinate independence
formulation where uh we do use
coordinates when we try to do
calculations but we want to make sure
that our results don't matter. uh now if
you do me you do measurements using one
coordinate system I do you measurements
other coordinate system we better know
how to translates about our results how
to go back and forth so so this
coordinate independence
uh is is was an important
um realization like 100 years ago or so
and then we kind of push it to the
limits and um the argument here will be
that biology deserves the same
evolutionary biology deserves the same
and whatever you want to formulate it
it's better be coordinate independent.
Now if the if the um coordinate
coordinates uh exist and and if there
there is a preferred preferred set of
coordinates then we call it uh symmetry
breaking and we say okay well why do we
need to break this symmetry then so you
you either have to formulate your um uh
system in a coordinate independent way
or provide a mechanism of why is it that
the preferred coordinate system emerged.
So, so that's uh kind of uh the the
general uh strategy here. So, like you
know given an example um in in in
physics we have so-cal law symmetries
and there's certain transformations
between space and time that kind of um
make sense. They they shouldn't they
shouldn't be preferred time coordinates
but we didn't know about that you know
200 years ago or so. And uh because
apparently it is broken. We we do have a
preferred coordinate system here. uh we
we we have um cosmic microwave
background radiation which kind of uh um
prefers a slicing temporal slicing and
and um and so so then then you say okay
yeah your your theory may have this
invariance but then it was broken uh and
then you have to explain why is it
broken. So, so either or uh you start
with without making additional
assumptions and I think you should do
the same in biology and if if it turns
out that the symmetry is broken then
then provide a mechanism for that. Um so
that's kind of the first motivations is
kind of which which like from the very
first time I started working in biology
like bugged me a lot. Why why do we not
have a clean mathematical formulations
of what we what we mean by things? Okay.
So the second one is this um you know
fitness landscape that um as I
understood more understood as as a as a
metaphor when we when it it is asking
for actually geometric formulation you
know landscape is geometry there are
distances there are shortcuts and and
all that um and when when the organs are
mutating there's certain distances which
they look far away but actually closer
there are different um forms of
organisms that that have um same threads
and they may be far away in the uh
genotype space but should be closed in
the phenotype space. So so all those
things are um are present there without
rigorous mathematical formulation so
that um you know idea was actually let's
let's fix that as well. So let's kind of
identify all the spaces all the
mathematics you know all the distances.
Yeah, it may look heavy at first. Um,
but once you uh actually, you know,
study the, you know, once you once you
settle all this mathematical chaos at
the end of the day, you can start asking
precise questions and that's um and and
then you'll see that this mathematics is
just a necessary condition for you to to
make like even first step in
understanding what evolution is. Um, and
now there there's I entered this field
through this evolution as learning uh
paradigm. Um
uh again there was not a clear
indication of why should evolution be a
learning dynamics and so it would be
nice to uh derive and show that it is
true that in certain limits starting
from some assumptions you can show that
the system is undergoing learning
dynamics and you know learning dynamics
is not uh classical Hamiltonian dynamics
learning dynamics is not uh quantum uh
unitary dynamics it's something else and
and uh even if and some limits they can
can um lead to similar. So so why why is
it learning? Why is it learning other
than again it looks like learning? Can
can we actually you know set up uh
minimal assumptions uh and you know
solve equations and derive um
evolutionary equation as a learning
dynamics and then if that's so what are
the corrections is it exactly like
learning dynamics and machine learning
or are there corrections you know what
what's what's the status of that so
that's kind of the three motivational
steps you know it has to be uh
independent you know by geometry we need
to uh not just use metaphors it has to
be geometry
And if we we think that learning dynamic
is somehow important uh we should show
it where does it come from. Um so then
the goals just in summary you know we we
do want general coariance which is a
fancy way of saying that has to be
coordinate dependent. Uh we do need to
have equations of motion. Uh you know
the the the organism evolve evolving
organ change their states and so there
has to be equations that describe those
evolutions. Uh now once we get those
evolutionary equations are they the same
as um machine learning? Are they um
gradient descent-like equations or are
they uh simple like classical mechanics
or they you know what what are the
equations? What what are the the
equations? Uh now once we get there
there is a choice of um using different
equations and they would describe u a
family of equations um which and they
would describe different learning
algorithms. So then once we are there we
can ask okay what what is the learning
algorithm that the nature lo uses on the
level of evolutionary dynamics you know
it may have it figured out the most
useful algorithm or or or not or or
maybe you know where do we maybe there's
some other clever algorithm that we
haven't discovered mathematically but
you know nature has it and then we can
kind of um use the hints from the
evolution dynamics to to improve our
algorithm. So it can go it can work both
ways. We as long as we formulate it
using the same kind of u mathematical
language we can map it better very often
certain algorithms from biology would
come and help in machine learning and
then now that we understand machine
learning so much better maybe we can map
and and model um the evolution dynamics
um better and and again this the
question I'm going to ask here on the
level of evolutionary dynamics is um
just one level, right? But you know, you
can be asking the very same set of
questions on any other level in the
physics and chemistry and um um in the
in the behavior of individual al um
organisms
you don't have to you know look at the
entire populations here is I I'm picking
that particular level uh as an
illustration but the set of questions
may would have to can be very very the
same. uh the conclusion may be that the
learning dynamics is not an appropriate
language and and here's why and then you
would have to you know turn to a
different framework or or enhance that
framework but but at least this is this
is the problem. Okay. So um moving
forward uh just an outline of results um
and um so so uh there will be a
generally current formulation
um and for that one step step needs to
be taken and we have to embed the
discrete space in a continuous manifold.
uh the fact that such embedding should
exist tells us uh because we know about
the existence of this genotype to
phenotype uh map where we do know that
discrete structures of the genotype are
mapped to the continuous you know traits
of the of the phenotype space. So, so
the existence of the of this embedding
is there. Uh we just need to to um
define it and then once it defined it uh
we we we can start working with it. We
can use the machinery of differential
geometry uh to move things around and um
know exactly what they mean. Um like for
example, you know, where are the
distances defined? Is it in genotype
space or in phenotype space or you know
uh the the the evolutionary dynamics
does take space in genotype or phenotype
space you know and all those questions
you can answer once uh you've clarified
the mapping and uh the the one thing
that is people in this community some
kind kind of love a lot is a price
equation um I never understood the
reason um I will d use the price
equation to derive lambda equation
because price equation is an exact
equation equation and it's uh in physics
we kind of actually like non-exact
equations because if something
mathematically exa exact it's not
physics uh if something that uh is not
cannot be proved but discovered to match
experiment that you know makes us
exciting you know uh you cannot prove
direct equation you cannot prove
sheroninger equation but uh you can
discover that this is the equation that
describe the dynamics and certain limits
and that that kind of so price equation
is is a math equation But starting from
this by making certain assumptions you
actually end up with the lambda
equation. Uh and and that is in my
dictionary exciting equation because
it's it's an an approximate it's not an
exact but actually is describing um
things that you can observe uh compare
and check against um in your experiment.
So I'll tell you about that. Uh there
will also be corrections to l equation.
So l equation is not a final answer but
that that kind of brings us closer to
why evolution is learning. So once I
show you lambda equation you'll say oh
yeah yeah yeah that's you know this is a
gradient descent there is something that
descending and something is is learning.
um you you you you have to take one more
step to get from the lambda equation to
the learning equation to the coarian
gradient descent or in this case case
ascent uh and that is the identification
of the coariance matrix with the metric.
So metric is the machinery that measures
distance
um in in differential geometry coariance
matrix. So it's geometry. So metric is
geometry. Um now coariance is all about
statistics. It's about how you know
things are correlated or not. Uh and not
clear you know both are matrices. Um not
clear that one has to be um equal to
another or proportional. Uh and actually
to make this identification you have to
use this so-called maximum entropy
principle. Um now if if this would not
be correct then the distribution would
not be maximum entropy and um so so
somehow the the uh variations tell us uh
how hard it is to make steps in certain
directions. So, so and and and uh and so
it tells us about the measure of you
know how far away how many fluctuation
steps do you need to take to go east or
how many fluctuation steps you have to
take to go uh north and so that that
gives you and that's kind of intuitive
way of seeing why the coariance is
equivalent to metric but not exactly
metric it's inverse metric but
nevertheless it's u again it's just a
machinery to measure distances and once
we get through that so once we derive
the Lambda equation and u we are we'll
be in the and once we map the lambda
equation to the equation of learning we
will be in the game of choosing learning
algorithm and then here we will say okay
well uh I can just reason with a pure
thought and say okay nature should have
discovered this algorithm because it's
the most efficient and then you know
that's my theoretical prediction or you
can say well but you know this is still
a a model So why not just go to the
experiments and see what actually the
nature discovered and then and then here
you'll have you know theory tells you
that it should be this um the the
experiment will show you something else
and then you'll say okay well that means
my theory is not complete I have to uh
completed something but anyways this is
kind of will be the the final game I'll
identify the experiment that should be
conducted to identify exactly what is
the learning algorithm that evolutionary
system is uses uses. Now the the the
single organism who is learning
something during the lifetime may use a
completely different learning algorithm
and it um you know will work in
completely different space and and uh
you know it may may or may not discover
have discovered the most efficient
algorithm. Again this is a separate
experiment on separate level uh where
all those questions can be asked.
Okay so let's move on. Um so mapping is
the first thing and um I start with this
genetic sequence of those uh letters
from the four-letter alphabet right so
uh the the standard setup now we we know
that this genotypes are mapped to some
phenotype space this is called the
phenotype map u we don't really know
what the map is um but we can study its
properties and the one thing it should
have there should be uh since the
phenotype space is continuous and the
genotype space is discrete. There has to
be an intermediate. First you have to
map it to some continue I'll call it
continuous genotype space and then from
there you can have a continuous map from
the type. Think about this as uh kind of
um embedding, right? So you embed um
discrete numbers into now uh one example
like digital computers do it all the
time. We have uh bits that record the
real numbers and and so the bits are
mapped to real numbers but you know you
have to do this mapping. So you have to
kind of say uh what is close what is far
away and uh and uh you know u if you you
can ask me is it true that the genotypes
are like bits are mapped to the real
numbers like phenotypes or I've done at
least that statistical test. No that's
not true. So it's not that's not how uh
genotype um are mapped but but but it is
true that we have to map discrete
genotypes to the continuous and that
that mapping should exist. uh now what
now this mapping doesn't uh yet tell us
about the distances um uh but uh of how
how things you know which
[clears throat] things are far away
which things are correlated all those
things are are um additional structures
they'll have to put in on the space but
at least there has to be a mapping. So
if we if you if you have the two
organisms with exactly the same genotype
they should be mapped to you know
exactly the same phenotype space and um
so I'll be denoting this genotype space
with Q's head stands for the discrete
[clears throat] and without hat is for
the continuous analog uh and so you can
kind of uh create for example a map of a
single um you know letter from the al
alphabet fourdimensional to some
d-dimensional real space. So if you have
four letters, you can cop you can map it
to three-dimensional space for example.
That would be non-trivial mapping. Um or
you can map it two dimensional space or
one dimensional. Mapping is to
fourdimensional would not be very
interesting. It would be like every
letter has its own um uh dimension. But
you can do that that as well. And then
you do this mapping for every single um
character in the sequence for every
single site. And so overall you have a
mapping which is you know d is some
number from I don't know one to three
and k is how many um how how long the
sequence is. So this is uh d * k
dimensional space to where very high
dimensional space which I call
continuous genotype space to where every
se single uh sequence would be mapped uh
to a point there. Now but but it is
already a continuous space. It means
that I can move continuously through
that space. Even even if when I move off
those lettuce points, the the points do
not really represent any discrete
genotypes. The the points are still
there. So I can still do the uh
integration. This is equivalent to kind
of taking a lattice right which only has
discrete lettuce position and trying to
define a continuous space out of this uh
for only for mathematical convenience
not because those um
because those other points represent any
uh real gen genotypes. So that's the
setup. So we have um we have a genotype
space discrete genotype space
um we have like you know b you know
digits like binary digits binary um like
in in a computer we have a continuous
gen type space where you allowed to take
intermediate values uh so it's not zero
and one it can be for example anything
between zero and one and then this guy
eventually is mapped to the continuous
phenotype case uh you can skip it and do
the direct mapping. It doesn't matter
the the the whole point is that there
such map has has to exist and then the
the whole idea is that in different
spaces the different structures live and
there will be metric that lives here
there will be metric this this here but
the question will be where is it defined
is it defined here or is it defined here
and how do you uh move certain
structures back and forth. So in
differential geometry we we call it push
forward. If you have a structure here
that you can push forward to this space
or a pull back. If you have a structure
here, then you can pull uh pull back.
But uh not uh all the structures you can
push forward and pull back. So some
structures you will only be able to pull
push forward and the others uh only pull
back. So that's kind of them.
Okay. Okay. So let's uh you know I spend
a bit of time here but this is kind of
foundation you know important setup. Uh
we need uh we need this map you know
with this map we cannot talk about
continuous phenotype space that's just
easily defined. So if you have a phenype
map uh we need to have it. Okay. So so
uh now uh a little bit about pushing
forward and pulling back. Um and um so I
start with the phenotype spaces n
dimensional. So, so we'll keep it the
genotype will be D * K dimensional. So,
K is the length of your sequence
number of sides and small D is uh
embedding of each uh the dimensionality
of embedding of each uh you know
character um each site. So, it's D sub K
and the N dimensional is the
dimensionality of the phenotype space.
Um and again usually people would you
know discuss phenotype space and they
would give names to different directions
dimensions in this phenotype space you
know this dimension describes the color
of eyes this is dimension describes the
you know color of hair or you know what
what other traits there are here we are
saying uh this is just one way of
looking at it but it's just n
dimensional space so let's just collect
um all of them together and then try to
see uh which directions in that space
are um far away directions, closed
directions, what is the metric? You
know, if you are traveling in that
space, how how how um if you are
mutating in that space, how how well you
are mutating in this space in the
genotype, but how how it would
corresponds to motion in the phenotype
space. Okay, so the first uh the the the
first object that you want to define is
um um is is a metric. So you want to
take a f type space and you say okay
well there is there has to be a metric
if it's a space certain things are close
by other things are far away. Um now uh
the machinery to define metric is
uh n byn matrix
uh so i and j go from one to n um and
then it's it's in gerally position
dependent so it's not um and that's what
makes it curve if it was position
independent. So if there was no x
dependence then then you could just
diagonalize it and define new
coordinates where everything is flat. So
in general it's not the case and that
what makes uh the machinery of
differential geometry useful. Okay. So
now um so that's what measures distances
in a genotype space. So that's is how
far away or sorry in a phenotype space.
Um now uh but uh what about how can you
pull back this matrix back to the
genotype space? So if you so if you have
the notion of distances and a phenotype
space and you if you have a map from the
genotype to phenotype space uh can you
measure distances in a genotype space
and that's kind of uh where all this
becomes uh useful. So yeah once you have
once you know distances uh you know the
how you know displacement is work. So
you know the displacement uh how the
displacement in the phenotype space
affected by the displacements in a
genype space through this formula. This
is kind of a partial derivative of the
phenotype map with respect to the
genotype coordinates. Um and and so uh
and this is like push forward. So if you
changed your position in gen space this
is by how much position in a phenotype
space will change. So you uh your your
starting object is you mutate it. Okay.
So you mutate it and because you know
this map you know by how much your
phenotype will change and the but you
cannot pull it back. What you can pull
back is the metric. So and this is how
it will work. If you know the distances
in a phenotype space uh you put those
two partial derivatives or what called
jacobians and then you now you know the
the metric in the genotype space. So so
again once you know the distances in a
phenotype you know the distances in a
genotype space but the displacements go
other way around. Now in order to know
which object is can be pushed back and
pulled forward the in physics we use
this you know vector and co- vector and
here it's just represented by either
upper or lower indices but that's um
okay so uh the and here's the like quick
biological interpretation of what I just
said. I'll I'll go a bit faster but let
me just say so the two genotypes are
close if they produce similar phenotypes
uh and that is regardless of the
molecular differences and that's kind of
what uh defines the distance and the
same genotype changes can have different
uh phenotypic consequences depending on
the genetic background. So that tells us
that the system is in generally curved.
So we there is no reason to expect that
it would be um
so so depending of the other states of
the other genomes you know certain uh
distances certain mutations will produce
you similar phenotypic states or or same
type and that's all just a way of saying
that the space is curved. Uh it's really
depends from where you start. So your
metric depends on where you stand. It's
not just one for all. Um okay so so
that's about distances now uh let's go
to this um statistics so it's always
will be interplay between geometry and
statistics so now uh so let's consider a
population of organisms
uh with different genotypes and I
describe it by row um and the idea is
that you want to apply this maximum
entropy principle which says that choose
the distribution with the largest
entropy given certain mean and certain
uh variance right or co-variance in the
multi-dimensional case and if you do
that the distribution will be this
Gaussian distribution given by that and
if you are working and that's important
if you're looking in the in the locally
flat frame then this will be just
chronica delta so it's u zero everywhere
but the main diagonal where it's one but
it is just uh because your coariance
matrix actually defines what the locally
frame metric. Once you want to move to a
different uh coordinate system uh then
this has to transform as a tensor and
and um uh this this is actually
covariance matrix and this will have to
transform in a certain way. So the
coariance it's inverse of the coariance
matrix. So uh and it has to transform uh
as a tensor and so which which tells us
that this
inverse metric the the object that
measures distances must be equal to the
coariance object that measures measures
statistics and like you know we already
said it intuitively
if it takes if your fluctuations are
very small in certain directions it's
kind of you know you have to go far uh
in terms of how many fluctuation steps
to get there and if they are large, you
can kind of get there faster. Uh, and so
in this sense, the the the only object
that makes sense to define distances in
this space. Uh, one of the objects there
is I'll I'll mention the other object
later um is is um is the coariance. And
then if you do that, you actually end up
with uh with a with a lambda equation
giving you stochastic gradient descent.
But we'll we'll get there. Okay. Okay.
So, so then you have the object that you
have you know population of organism
they have some coariance. This coariance
defines inverse metric in the genotype
space and we have a map we have a map of
how phenotype map of how to go from
genotype to to phenotype and so
therefore we can we can define we can
take this object the coariance and push
it forward. So if it had lower indices
we would not be able to push it forward
but because it's upper indices we can
push it forward and and that and that
will give us the metric on the on the
phenotype space. So so we have a
coariance in the genotype space uh that
gives us inverse metric in a phenotype
in the genotype space and now we can
push it forward to acquire the inverse
metric in the phenotype space and the
coarance in the phenotype space. So the
biological implication that this maximal
entropy principle
uh and without it we cannot really say
anything about the distances. So we have
to you know it's just a space right. So
just coordinates in order to have a
notion of what far close you have to
have some scale that tells you what it
is. So here the scale is fluctuations in
the given directions. Um and so so the
application is that this allows us to
identify the geometry with statistics.
Right? So the one defines the other. Now
statistics is something we can go and
measure, right? We can measure the
coariances or genotypes and then say
okay well there you go. So now we have a
geometry. Uh now if that's the geometry
what kind of algorithm does the nature
use to uh move in that geometry to to
mutate to to evolve in that geometry?
Okay. But uh for that we need to take
one more step in this going from the
price equation and um the point of this
slide is to demest demystify this price
equation which again uh is is just uh um
mathematical identity right so you
defined uh a change in the phenotype
um this way and w is u writing fitness
which is the log uh malthusian fitness
that I'll be using um basically this is
the definition of what the change is
defined.
X prime is the um offspring and here we
have the it depends on the parents,
right? And then uh we're trying to
measure here the difference of the
average phenotype. So that's that's one
way of of of saying what the average
phenotype will be. By the way, this is
uh uh not the only way. I could have uh
not used this. just look at the uh
entire population and say okay what's
expectation value after the mutation but
here I I I say uh change in the mutation
with with the with a given x so there's
there's a slight difference but anyways
I mean this is a good definition for the
change in the phenotype [snorts]
um so it's evolution in the phenotype
space of the average phenotype uh and
then it is expressed here as this and
it's continuous form here Um so usually
you don't see it in a continuous form
you have see it in a discrete form but
here I just written continuous form x's
are continuous variables um and um you
can basically split into the coariance
and the expectation value and uh it's
just identity so for so in the
expectation value um and if you say that
the expectation value is is just
basically equals zero so the offspring
has the same phenotype as as the you the
par parent then this vanishes and in
that limit you can now do the tailor
series expansion and convince yourself
that uh to the leading order this change
which is now written in the differential
form is just given by this where cig is
the coariance matrix of the x so it's
like x i xj expectation value weighted
by by w so um And then this is it. And
so that that's kind of one uh I mean
there should be probably one more line
just to show the expansion of this
actually gives you that. Um but you know
the the reason why you you have to put
log here because there is a change in w
divided by w which is kind of what you
have here. And so so there isn't uh much
of a mystery here. The only thing that
is uh true that there are other terms.
So this is not a complete picture. So if
you do this expansion there has to be
other high order terms which will have
second derivative of f uh with respect
to the average phenotype.
But this is interesting because you know
this price equation under certain
conditions and in a certain limit gives
us something that is exactly what the uh
coarian gradient descent is. Meaning the
change of a variable equals to the
gradient of the loss with what machine
learning people call this is um um uh
they call it um preconditioner.
Okay. Um but this preconditioner is
nothing but metric really. It's uh it
tells you again how certain directions
in the space are correlated and uh in
which direction you should be taking
large steps and which direction you
should be taking small steps things like
that. Okay. So uh and and lambda
equation is not this is not the only way
for you to define to derive it and
actually kind of it it is this seems to
be this the lowest order uh in whatever
model of solution dynamics you have. So,
so, so it's it's good because it tells
us that you know modeling evolution as
learning dynamics is not so bad but it
comes with a price. So now we have to uh
really think of this C uh as as a as a
metric and if you see this C as a metric
uh as a machinery of measuring distances
then it becomes learning dynamics and
the and the claim here that with the
maximum entropy principle it is uh it it
is the metric and so and so lambda
equation is the uh the equation for the
learning dynamics that we we have here.
Okay, moving on. Once you have this
equation in the phenotype space, you can
map it to the um you know equivalent
equation in the genotype space because
you can uh take those objects back and
then uh the biological implication will
be that evolution is a coaring gradient.
Well, ascent comes from the fact that we
just define it as uh negative uh you
know loss is negative of fitness. You
know, in the loss you go down, in
fitness you go up. So but but other than
that uh this is pretty much the equation
that we are using in the all modern uh
machine learning algorithms right. So
you know there is a trainable parameter
there is a metric and there is a
gradient of the loss and they together
tell us how how to descent or here how
to ascend. The only uh remaining part is
to figure out what is the right metric.
How do what is the right metric. So, so
before I I I said that the metric is
just given the by the coariance
uh of the
of the distribution but uh the the
evolving system or machine learning
system has to figure out at every step
what should it do you know it doesn't
have the luxury of like asking all of
the um all of the organisms in the
population you know what's your value of
the gen type what's your value of the
genotype let's get together calculate
the metric and now we'll make a step. Uh
there is no such like so it has to kind
of locally figure out what are the right
steps to take and that's where the
algorithmic nature of evolution comes
in. But the the the you know the result
here is that price equation with the
maximum entropy principle gives you the
covering gradient ascent and uh that's
great that's uh insurance. So quick map
from biology to machine learning.
So in biology we have a trainable
variable Q's and there are weights and
biases. However, Q's are not the ones
who determine your loss. Uh it is the
state of neurons that determines the
loss in machine learning and this is the
phenotype that determines your fitness
in the in biology. Now objective in in
machine learning it would be loss
function. Here it would it is fitness.
Uh now update rule lambda equation in um
uh biology uh covering gradient descent
in machine learning uh metric is uh
genotype metric G uh and then in machine
learning it is the you know people call
inverse preconditioner but again I I
would it is just metric it should be it
should have been called metric and uh to
to to avoid all the confusions now and
here comes the the part that that is I
haven't talked about that and that's
kind of punch line here. Now metric is
great but um in machine learning in
order to interpret what is the right
precondition you need to use statistics
of your gradients. to use statistics of
the gradients that you took um gradients
u derivatives of the loss with respect
to your trainable parameters uh and and
that that uh that should determine your
preconditioner and uh and the same you
need here which I'll talk about but it's
could be called noise coarian so it's
different from the coariance of the
distribution of organism it's a
coariance of steps that um evol evolving
system takes uh they're not the same. So
for one you have to look at the entire
population see its corance for other you
just can look at the one organism and
say okay what are the steps you're going
to be taking when you mutate you know
what is the distribution of the future
or past mutations that you have taken
those two different statistical objects
um and um and why why is it important is
because of what written on this slide so
we have established that's a coarian
gradient descent but there is uh you
know the the fitness has some noise or
the loss has some noise. And so when uh
the um
when when this um um loss function
fluctuates the steps fluctuate this is
like fluctuation of the environment and
because of this fluctuations the steps
uh descending or ascending steps will
fluctuate and so what's the coariance of
these steps and uh if you just ignore
this coariance and you always put here
metric equal to identity that's called
stochcastic gradient descent that's the
simplest algorith algorithms uh and and
again in a way this is what we would do
in the classical biology where we just
you know we don't put a metric we just
you know there's just different
directions and let's uh let's deal with
that later. Now there the other
possibility is to have this natural
gradient descent where you say the
metric is actually equal to the uh noise
coariance and um and the third
possibility which shows to be more
sufficient is in between uh is is
Adamike algorithm where you take this
noise coariance you take a square root
of it and that determines your metric
with uh some correction. So, so there
are choices uh between the noise
coariance in the coariance in the steps
that evolving system organism will take
and metric which is coariance of the
entire populations and how those two
structures are related to one another um
will um will determine what kind of
algorithm system uses. Does it does it
really remember uh the um does the
system remember all of the you know
steps it had taken and then constructed
a coariance matrix out of it took a
square root of it you know by some
algorithm and and used it or is it just
ignoring uh all of the coariances at all
and just uses identity matrix or it you
know there there are choices and what
what what is the right choice we don't
know know um the theory suggests it has
to be square root but um the theory may
may not be the right one. Okay. So now
um getting to the final uh slides of the
talk uh when where I say okay so let's
go to the real data uh what does the
real data uh tell us um about
>> by the way I'm I'm sorry there's
something going on with the slide it's
like um shifted like there's I don't
know if you can see that too but there's
the left part of it is missing somehow
like it's there's something going on
where the thing is bouncing back and
forth between some kind of a zoomed view
and
>> Okay. So, uh, zoomed view. Okay.
>> Yeah, there you go. That's Yeah, now now
we're back to
>> Okay, good. Good. All right. It's must
be a bug or something. Okay. So, so now
um Thanks. So, now we're going to uh to
to to the data, right? So, uh and again,
I'll just spell out once again what are
the two matrices that we're trying to
compare. Uh but uh if you go into the
data and you say all right so let's look
at the genotypic coariance let's take
this um large space of of um um
of of the of a population to take a
population of a given organ I've done it
myself for the um corona virus right so
you can get all this data I mean it will
take wouldn't take you much uh to
analyze the statistics and you'll will
see that coariance between um coariance
matrix once you form it it will be a
very large coariance matrix but
effectively uh the number of values uh
will be very effective rank will be very
low because this spectrum uh decays it
doesn't decay exponentially it decays as
power law so what does say that you have
some large values then uh then they
decay as a power law with power from one
to two and so on. So so very soon after
you know certain 100 or so I you have
very tiny values which means this space
isn't effectively there. So, so yeah,
the space is like 10 to the 9th
dimensional because there are 10 to the
nine u different uh characters in each
uh you know sequence in each genotype.
But but there's so much correlations
between them. Then then if you actually
analyze this space uh and and u
construct a coariance matrix you'll
realize there's only like a 100
dimensions or so of of um which would be
the effective rank of the of the system.
And it's again the same similar thing
would happen even with uh um digits
right so computer digits you can have
lots of computer digits
uh and all of them are mapped to like
single real number right so then
eventually you will see that you know
you have a very high dimensional
discrete space of bits because there are
lots of bits but then there maybe all
just mapped to a single real number and
then effective dimensionality is very
low and there's some certain
correlations but for that you need to
see correlations and so I've checked
correlations. Genotype doesn't have
correlations as if we are mapping uh
bits to to continuous numbers. That's
not the correlations they have. They
have a different correlations than uh
but nevertheless this coariance matrix
is a very low dimensional. It's about
100 um and uh and so we are dealing with
low dimensional spaces despite of being
you know tricked by having this 10 to 9
dimensional really it is rather low
dimensional where all the interesting
dynamics uh takes place and and then
this 100 dimensional so mapped to the
phenotype space which again I don't know
what the dimensionality of this but this
is this is set up but luckily we don't
have to go to the phenotype space we can
do all the anal analysis just in
genotype space we can analyze the
coariance of a populations of like let's
say corona viruses uh and then uh if we
conduct certain experiment analyze the
coariance of changes of genotypes as
they evol so so then we will have like
two coariance matrices one coariance
matrix in a population at a given time
which may be evolving there's you know
uh um
the new new variants are produced and so
the average genotype shifts and then you
know once it shifts maybe the uh the the
the coariance of them also you know
fluctuates so that's kind of evolution
uh of of the whole population that you
can do and and that's been analyzed that
that you know even I can do uh with
available data but but what what is
missing is actually tracking down
individual you know mutations of you
know this uh um coronairus is came from
that. And so to do this such and such
step was taken. And so uh and acquiring
this uh like um individual mutational
statistics you can get uh uh coariance
ma matrix of of of mutations of
individual mutations of changes right so
so so and that and that's different
different one one is about changes and
and the other about you know state
overall state of the entire and so if we
had both if we had both then we would
just take those two matrices and say
what is the functional form of one
matrix to produce the other. Um and u
for the very least we could have just
you know diagonalized those matrices and
say well do they actually have the same
um um you know the same vectors right so
at least that or or they're completely
different and they're random to one
another and one is not a function of the
other then then we would say okay so
then there's more to model and
understand but if there there they can
be modeled as one as a function of the
other then the answer can be you know
it's one of those three or or something
else some other functional form and then
we can say all right so now we know the
type of algorithm that the corona virus
is using and then uh and then what will
be missing the the mechanism right so
even if you have the answer of what it
using what is the mechanism of keeping
track of those coariances how do how do
where do they record the coariances so
that they can use uh of the previous
mutation is there a mechanism to record
previous mutations so that the future
mutations are using it or or it's just
completely you know random shifts and
there's not and there's no nothing
clever into in that and there's just you
know random noise that generates it then
it would be more closer to the stoastic
gradient descent and so you'll be able
to distinguish uh between different
learning algorithms. So uh here is the
the summary of this experimental
challenge. So we do know this we do know
uh uh so QA again this is your genotypes
and so we we we can calculate the
average genotype for any population you
can multiply them we can calculate the
covariance uh of any genotype so this
this can be done so finding this uh G
inverse is easy uh but here is the
challenge finding the changes in
genotype uh with time that's hard that's
kind of uh um you
know it's yeah so it's kind of tracing
back the statistics. So um and and that
you you can think about algorithms how
to do that but you need more than just
information about uh here is the bunch
of uh tests we've performed and here is
the you know the sequences we extracted.
you need more of the temporal um
information about what's was happening
and that that is not something that is
available in those big data databases.
You can upload there's temporal
statistics of the entire population is
there. You can you know all of the tests
here all test there but following
individual mutations is not something
that it's it's a challenge. It's
challenge uh experimental. How do you do
that right? So you have all those
viruses that mutate. How do you actually
extract uh individual trajectories
for for them? um and and figuring out
what this coariance matrix is is is
would be a big challenge. Uh but from
the theory from the perspective of the
learning theory from what we know this
is where the answer to what the learning
algorithm lies. So is it this or this or
that? Okay. So let me um now one slide
and I'll be done. So I'll not torture
you more. Uh so one more slide is that
this isn't a complete story. So uh the
coaring gradient descent is great but if
we are to follow this price equation and
do the expansion further there were high
order terms and so this next order term
comes from the hashing uh from a second
derivative of the um of the of the um of
the loss function or of the fitness. Now
if that is exists there uh if well this
definitely exists but there's also this
skewess tensor and that can be measured
so that thing can be measured you can
just go to the population say say okay
so is it uh how um how isotropic it is
right so is there a skewess in the so is
a gaussian modeling
um good enough or there like tails that
are not gausian uh you know you always
do first modeling gausian uh but then
skewess is is something that and if it's
essential if it's uh if it's uh if it
has a you know there not necessarily the
tail is non gausian that would be would
not be something I expect but something
non non symmetric right so you have uh
um mutation to the left and mutation to
the right are not um equally equally
likely something like this distribution
not mutation again we're not talking
about for now it's a distribution and
then there would be correction to lambda
equation and if that
uh that can be modeled as well but but I
think the first you know starting point
is just lambda equation and it's good
that it is just reduces to a gradient
descent which we understand very well
okay so let me just summarize u mention
uh challenge once again and then
answer questions if you have um so so
general coariance uh is a is a must in
order for us to study any and model any
system. Without that we do not um know
whether our models or results will agree
if somebody decides to use different
coordinates different labeling. Now if
it turns out that the some labeling is
preferred
uh then then let it be let let's then
let's show that um this there has to be
mechanism for this uh coordinates to be
preferred. So, so it's either or. It's
either you have to in usually you don't
make an assumption until you prove
Okam's razor, right? So, you start with
the simplest possible assumption.
There's nothing there. Uh so, it should
be generally coarant. It's complete
symmetry. But, you know, it may be
broken and then then you have to study
the symmetry breaking mechanisms. Um uh
and so so we do know that embedding
exist because of this phenotype being
continuous variable. um and uh that
gives us a hope that differential
geometry can be useful. Now if the uh
phenotype traits would be uh discrete
then then would be dealing completely
discrete spaces and then only an
approximate notion of continuity could
have been used. Maybe here it's also an
approximate notion of continuity but
nevertheless it's useful uh it allows us
to use you know to differentiate use
calculus basically. Um okay so then uh
to to put metric we need study noise
right so coariance matrix uh and the
distance is defined by the uh through
this maximum entropy principle is
defined by the by the coariance uh now
lambda equation uh which for some reason
I don't know not very well known in the
community or I think deserve a a lot
more attention than it it has uh because
nearly any derivation of the
perturbative dynamics I've done leads to
lambda equations. So here I showed the
derivation from a price equation but uh
there there were other uh things that I
that I did and so lambda equation turns
out to be uh following it follows from
price equation and in under assumption
of this maximum entropy principle it is
exactly the covarian gradient ascent.
So, so it is learning, it is learning,
it is a learning dynamics um in the in
the simplest limit and and and then we
should kind of use all we know about
learning dynamics to to study it and and
the first thing uh we know I know is
that metric plays a central role but how
the metric um uh related to the uh to
the to the steps the system takes or the
noise coariance is the key. So um now
you can run it on your computer and see
the stoastic gradient descent works
pretty well. Uh because uh G is just
identity. Uh but then you can try Adam
uh and it works even better. Now I know
why it works better. I haven't talked
about why it works better and it again
has to do with uh with a certain
symmetry breaking certain preferred
coordinate systems that actually tell us
that that Adam should work. It's uh and
and there is a preferred coordinate
system. Uh so I so I'm like arguing two
opposite things. So first you have to
start with general coariance nothing
preferred but then I'm telling you there
is something preferred. Yeah but you
just have to follow steps. First you
don't make an assumption and and later
um and and and maybe that's why nature
would use atom. It's just because of the
realization that there is a preferred um
preferred storage of states. Right? So
genotypist has kind of preferred a way
of storing states. It's has to be um
okay. So and and then that raises this
experimental challenge which um you know
we're trying now to get the data but
that's turned out to be not as easy as
as it sounds. So measure the noise
coariance of individual evolutionary
changes and once you have that see how
it is related to the population
coariance and if there are relations
then there we go. We've identified the
what the algorithm nature uses for
evolution. Now it may use a different
algorithm for you know everyday dynamics
right. So there's learning takes place
on all time scales as um you know you
know very well and uh and and uh you
know the the answer you get on this
evolutionary time scales for for covid
for example may differ from the
evolutionary time scales for human and
and it's we don't know it's too early to
say but I think there is enough
theoretical support telling us that we
should uh do more experiments trying to
identify
What is the learning algorithm that that
that is being used? It's it's not just
learning. Learning again, I don't want
it to be a metaphor metaphor. I want it
to be more precise. Okay, I'm done. I've
exactly one hour. Okay, so that's good.
As promised, uh sorry it took me so
long.
>> Cool. Thank Thanks very much. Yeah,
unfortunately I'm going to have to run
in a minute, but um uh I do have a
question. Could you uh maybe just take a
minute and summarize the implications
for biologists who are not exactly in
that field, maybe aren't as maths savvy
as you are. What are what are the
implications? Like what are you act what
are you saying about evolution that
everybody needs to understand even if
they're not in the you know in the in
the weeds on this stuff?
>> Right. Right. Well, I mean um maybe I'll
repeat it but once more trying to spell
it out. So, so f first uh try to be as
as agnostic as possible to to the
variables you use. Uh because every time
you say I use such and such variables,
you make an assumption hidden
assumption. Uh and if your results
depends on the choice of the variables,
this is
>> so what what might an example of that
be? Like for example, you know, I want
to use color of the hair as one of the,
you know, phenotype. And another person
says, well, why why that? Why not, uh,
you know, two times color of the of the
hair times plus three times, I don't
know, height. Uh, what made you so sure
that this is the right variable? or uh I
mean I'm I'm giving some ridiculous
examples just to show that whenever you
do your modeling and and you set some
variable to something and then your
result depends on that variable uh you
you either your result should depend on
the choice of the variable and then you
have to show why the symmetry was broken
or your result should independ
so so so the coariance uh you know and
or when you know you don't have to write
equation you write do simulations. So in
the simulations you you choose to call
something
uh something right and then if if it's
one variable there is not much rotations
you can do but once you have it
simultaneously study two or three
variables uh it's very important to to
keep general coariance unless your point
is to prove why it was broken. So
coariance is choice of of coordinates.
So that that's kind of one important uh
lesson I guess. And then then um the
second lesson is is uh
what is the defining equation for your
dynamics right so so first you know it's
coordinates what is changing those are
coordinates and secondly how they are
changing right so so and identifying how
they changing again you can just write
stocastic gradient descent but you make
uh another assumption hidden assumption
that um that there that you think that
the distances
uh in the directions of the hair color
and of the height are kind of what you
wrote. Uh you make this assumption right
other than just saying let's measure uh
how important the displacements in that
direction versus that direction and and
and for the and then then we are coming
not to just coariance of the state but
the coariance of the equation of motion
and the equation of motion should be
coarant. So that's kind of the second
message. Don't don't just write down
equation uh and their distances like
every every variable
um should be dressed uh with with a
metric. There can be other things that
can be dressed with. So now I'm talking
about metric but the you know classical
mechanics there is simplectic structure
that has to be present in order for us
to actually make sense and be able to
again go from one coordinate system to
here it's the metric. So that's kind of
uh the second once you identify your
states and your evolution. Okay. Then
then what is it that you're measuring
exactly? Okay. State how it changes and
what you're measuring. It's like three
posture of the quantum mechanics. the
state or classical again anything state
how it changes and then what is it that
you are measuring actually and and you
want to come up with a with a with a
measurement that is uh again agnostic as
possible to your choice of coordinate
system and and be as as uh um you know
as invariant as possible. So that's kind
of a a general general message. uh but
but again I mean I'm sure the the
specifics will depend very much on the
on the setup because I'm claiming this
is not just for evolutionary uh dynamics
for any dynamics you would have to
identify the state space the dynamics
and then the measurement so that kind of
yeah the idea
>> got it got it yeah okay all right uh
yeah thanks I need to I need to think
about how we might be able to
apply some of this to our computational
models. I mean we don't have any biology
data of the resolution that you need
here but but we do have computational
models of evolution and
>> well it's the evolution or I mean you
have uh great experiments with uh with
with agents
>> right so so modeling and understanding
how how uh things learn on different I'm
I would be more interested in actually
in in that right so you have you have
experimental data of um uh of of
learning that takes place at the level
of I don't know individual cells right
so I mean
>> we have cells we have gene regulatory
networks we have lot of altera dynamics
we have lots of weird stuff that learns
>> right so so so so those systems have to
be described with states and evolution
laws okay so so uh and now I understand
that the statistics you get from
experiment may not be as clean as just
you know state and here's evolution but
theory always is in the theory. You have
to identify what is the relevant state
space, what are the relevant dynamics
there and and uh and and if the if we
can identify the relevant state space,
write in the coarent way identify the
correct uh you know derive lambda like
equation or coarent gradient like
equations but but for the dynamics of I
don't know um individual cells that that
are trying to minimize um or extra
compromise some other function and that
that would be um but but again this
comes to the point what is it possible
to measure so because you know I'm
starting it here from the under
assumption that certain things can be
measured right so but but not everything
can be measured so and and uh if you are
able to measure certain states and
changes of the certain states and if you
do think that states are changing
according to the some kind of learning
dynamics optimization um then we're in
business then we can say all right so
let's uh figure out uh what is the
metric in that space what is the and
let's make predictions of how how you
know what do we expect even like you
know on average what will happen how
fast the system will reach equilibrium
uh um things like that so so yeah I mean
uh that it's uh um I think I think I'm
more interested in applying actually to
different lab and and u what I wasn't
talk didn't talk about at all is
interaction between different levels
because that's kind of a hidden uh
missing missing piece in all of the
theory uh constructed so far. So we we
we know what happens as learning on a on
a given level. We know how to describe
it. But there is a coupling between
levels and it's top down coupling and
bottom up coupling uh both both ways and
and and they they should basically
modify the equations that that I wrote
here and uh somehow and that's that's
missing and so maybe for modeling
certain levels coupling gives you the
dominant contribution right so so and
and if it does then this is not uh then
in addition to you know this term Here
there would be another term here that
would you know even instead of that term
that would describe uh coupling to um uh
degrees of freedom that u working on a
different level. So so there there there
is um I think that the the theory of
this multi-level learning is is not
completely welldeveloped but that's
that's another you know we do need
experiments but yeah I mean I'll be
happy if there's some interesting data
you need to like interpret or something.
I mean it would be real to to think
about.