Hello YouTube. So I have a number of
videos on the different theories of
truth that are popular in contemporary
philosophy. Um but all of those previous
videos have presented theories that
treat truth uh as essentially a feature
of propositions or at least a feature of
some sort of linguistic item. So you
know we will say that the proposition
snow is white is true or the proposition
the cat is on the mat is true. Uh only
propositions or or things that assert
propositions such as sentences, beliefs,
assertions and so on only those things
can be true or false. Um truth is
basically linguistic or or conceptual.
Uh, now there's an interesting article
called In Defense of Non-propositional
Truth by Chris Rollwe and Mark Dixon.
I'm probably pronouncing one RS Rollwe's
name incorrectly. I'm sorry about that
if so. But uh anyway, the title of this
uh suggests uh as the title suggests,
this defends the idea that
non-propositional non-llinguistic
objects can be true. So this offers a a
radically different approach to truth
than than what's common in current
analytic philosophy. So um as Ross and
Dixon point out within the English
language there are a variety of ways of
using the word true. I mean we we
actually don't just say that
propositions are true. Uh we may also
say that love is true, that a friend is
true, that a coin is true, you know. So
there's there's true love, a true
friend, a true coin. Now, uh most
philosophers will generally assume that
these non-propositional uses of the word
true are sort of beside the point,
right? Like when we're constructing a
theory of truth in philosophy, um we
don't need to account for them. Uh so
for instance, Rules and Dixon quote
Michael Lynch who begins his book the
nature of truth um with the following
with the following claim.
One can speak of true friends, true
north, aiming true and so on. The sense
of the word that concerns philosophers,
however, is not that. Uh in the
courtroom, we want the witness to report
what she believes to be true. That is to
express true propositions. That is the
sense of the word that matters most in
our everyday lives. Um and I suppose the
idea is supposed to be that's the sense
of the word that matters most to
philosophers. I'm not I'm not sure that
that's the sense that matters most in
our everyday lives, but the claim is
certainly that's the most that's the
that's the sense that matters most to
philosophers, right? Truth is a property
of propositions.
Um, so I suppose I mean we can kind of
distinguish three different views that
might downplay non-propositional truth.
First of all, we might hold that
non-propositional truth is just
non-existent. That there's no there's no
legitimate non-propositional use of the
word true. Um I suppose that claim would
be somewhat implausible given that
English does have all of these
non-propositional uses. So a couple more
plausible options. Uh so one option is
what Ross and Dixon called restriction.
Uh according to restriction, the only
philosophically important use of the
word true is as a predicate or attribute
ascribed to propositional content uh or
that which has such content such as
sentences, utterances, beliefs,
judgments, statements. So you know
non-propositional truth exists. You
know, obviously we we may legitimately
talk about a true friend or a true coin,
but it's philosophically irrelevant.
A more modest claim is what we might
call non relation. Uh so according to
non- relation um other uses of the word
true are just not relevantly related to
the use of true as a predicate ascribed
to propositional content uh or or to
that which has such content such as
sentences, utterances, beliefs, etc. Um,
so the the thought on on the
non-relation view is, yeah, I mean,
non-propositional truth might be
philosophically relevant, but it's just
it's not relevant specifically to
theories of propositional truth. So
maybe there's plenty of contexts in
which philosophers should be concerned
about non-propositional truth, but it's
just not got anything to do with, you
know, theories of truth that
philosophers have been concerned with.
um you know, I guess you're going to
have to come up with some separate
theory of truth for the
non-propositional truth. Uh and and so
at least in terms of what you know, this
video series has been focused on,
non-propositional truth is just
irrelevant. I mean, the point of
non-relation is that if I'm interested
in in propositional truth, as many
philosophers are, then I don't need to
consider all of these other uses of the
word true. I don't need to consider the
idea of a true friend or a true coin.
Um, one of the things that we care about
in philosophy is knowledge and belief.
Knowing what the world is like and we
want to have true beliefs about the
world. We want to understand what it is
to have true beliefs. This is where, you
know, propositional truth comes in. So
what we have in mind when we present
theories of truth like correspondence
theory, coherence theory, pragmatism,
you know, is is this basically um I mean
when you look at these introductions to
theories of truth, authors do tend to
explicitly note these alternative uses
of true. Um but they note them in order
to put them to one side as uh as Michael
Lynch did in that quote. All right. So
at the very least it looks like they're
committed to non- relation um and maybe
even to restriction. So Ross and Dixon
present two theories of truth on which
truth is fundamentally non-propositional
and this of course is going to challenge
both of these claims even the more
modest non- relation claim. Um so I'm
going to first consider a couple of
theories that that they that they offer
and then we'll look at the arguments
against non-propositional truth.
All right. So first of all there is the
non-deception theory of truth. Uh this
theory of truth is attributed to the
early Buddhism of the piec and also the
mad madiamaka tradition. Uh the basic
idea of this uh is as follows. So
according to the nondeception theory, X
is true if and only if X is nondeceptive
and X is false if and only if X is
deceptive. Truth in this sense can be a
property of pretty much anything,
propositions, objects, phenomena,
appearances,
and and truth is attributed to
propositions in the same sense that it's
attributed to these other things. So all
of all of these things are taken to be
truth bearers. Um and I mean the basic
idea as I said is is very
straightforward. It's something is true
just in case it does not deceive us. So
take for example uh the phrase a true
chair. A true chair is a chair that can
be trusted to support one's weight
without wobbling around.
So the the idea is this. Chairs play a
particular kind of role in our lives. I
mean basically they're they're designed
to be sat upon. So, we see an object
that looks like a chair and we have the
expectation that when we sit on it, it
will support our weight.
A true chair is a chair that supports
the weight of the people who use it
because it isn't deceptive. It doesn't
lead you astray. You expect a certain
thing to occur when interacting with the
chair based on the designated use of
that chair, and that thing does in fact
happen. Of course, we have other
expectations of chairs too, like a
certain degree of comfort. A chair that
causes back pain after sitting on it for
just one minute is not going to be a
true chair because we expect a chair to
be comfortable for a long period of
time. So, you know, the idea is that
whether an object is deceptive or
non-deceptive and therefore whether it's
true or false is dependent on the
expected uses of the object. So,
similarly, take a true coin. Well, this
is something that appears to be a coin
and can legitimately be used as a coin.
So, it was produced by the right kind of
institution and can legally be used in
commerce. A false coin would be a
counterfeit coin or maybe a coin
designed as a prop for a film or a coin
designed as a prank or whatever. Um,
none of those coins can legally be used
to exchange goods.
So the idea from the the Buddhists at
least um and this is as RS and Dixon put
it is they say
social conventions establish objects by
their function as they relate to the
experiencer. So this is easiest to see
when it comes to artifacts, right? Like
a chair has a socially determined
function. It's supposed to support your
weight when you sit down and that
manifests in particular ways in your
experience. um you know there's certain
experiences that you expect to have on
interacting with a chair. Something may
appear to serve this function. So it may
be that something is classifiable as a
chair because of its appearance, right?
Like it has the right look. It has you
know the four legs and you know the back
and the thing to sit on. Everything has
the right look but then it fails right?
Like it just can't support any weight.
So it's not a true chair. you class it's
classified as a chair because it appears
to serve the relevant function but then
it fails to serve that function. It's
not a true chair. Um now on the Buddhist
view all phenomena even supposedly
natural phenomena are distinguished on
the basis of some sort of socially
determined function. Um one way to put
this is there isn't there aren't really
any natural kinds. You know we make up
the kinds. Um, so for instance, one of
the central socially determined
functions of water is to quench one's
thirst. And that function is of pretty
significant importance in most contexts
because it relates to our very survival.
So we we determine that something is
water on the basis of various
appearances, you know, I mean like so I
see that I see this liquid coming out of
the tap. It's it's clear. It's odless.
Um, you know, it it has the right sort
of uh viscosity and so on. and uh you
know so okay that's water and then I'm
expecting all right when I when I drink
it it's going to quench my thirst but
then I drink it and I find out that it's
salt water it fails a central function
so it's not true water
now of course you don't need to accept
you know Buddhist metaphysics in order
to accept the non-deception theory of
truth the point is just this is a
context in which you know this theory of
truth is a natural idea actually it's
worth noting that from the you know from
the Buddhist point of view uh ultimate
reality is emptiness. We can always push
on things in such a way that they fail
to meet some sort of socially determined
function. Only only nana enlightenment
is totally non-deceptive. Conventional
reality is always deceptive in various
ways. But I I mean that's kind of a
tangent that we don't really need to get
into. So anyway, Ross and Dixon
summarize the point of the non-deception
theory. Phenomena or objects are true
when they function correctly on an
epistemically informed social
understanding.
I mean perhaps one way to think about
this is in terms of the functional roles
of objects and the expectations in the
world that they and the expectations
that they generate within us. When we
interact with the world, we perceive um
what Gibson would call affordances
uh things that the environment offers to
in to the individuals um or
opportunities for action pro presented
by the environment. So like when I look
at a door, I see the doorork knob and
the doorork knob is shaped in such a way
to suggest that I could grasp and turn
it, you know, like the the actual shape
of a doorork knob like fits my hand and
it and it and it has a shape that like
suggests grasping and turning. Um, so a
doorork knob affords twisting and
thereby opening a door. Like a doorork
knob is is almost like a sign that lets
you know that you can open the door with
this tool. Now suppose that the doorork
knob was placed much higher on the door
out of easy reach. Well then it would no
longer afford the same opportunity for
interaction. So affordances are
dependent on the capacities of the
organism. Um but the key thing is of
course the environment can be
misleading. The doornob may be a false
doornob. It may be there merely for
decoration you know. So so do doorork
knobs they have a particular function.
They're deter that's determined by our
physical capacities and by social
conventions. The fake doorork knob
affords the same action as the real
doorork knob because it invites you to
grasp and turn it in the same sort of
way because it it has the same
appearance but it does not fulfill the
function. So it's deceptive and
therefore false.
So this is the general idea. Now it
should be easy to see how this kind of
thing applies to propositions. What
we're going to say is the proposition
snow is white is true in most contexts
because it's non-deceptive. Um, it picks
out snow and the state of snow. And this
proposition can guide us smoothly in our
interactions with snow. By contrast, the
proposition snow is black in most
contexts is deceptive. It it appears to
be meaningful and maybe you know it it
might even somehow appear to be true
sometimes. But the but the idea is if if
I were to accept this proposition,
I would find myself surprised at the
state of snow. I would I would soon
encounter a tension between my beliefs
and my experiences of the world. And I
would also encounter a kind of tension
between, you know, what I'm thinking and
saying and what other people are
thinking and saying, you know. So there
would be a kind of uh it it would create
like an obstacle to smooth interaction
with the world and for that reason snow
is black is deceptive. So the point is
we have a single unified
idea of truth where this idea of truth
is a property of both propositions and
all sorts of non-propositional objects.
I mean this theory of truth can apply to
everything. Um so that's the idea. I
should note incidentally that this
example of you know snow is white, snow
is black raises something of a challenge
or perhaps it's not so much a challenge
but just a different a different
perspective from the standard theories
of truth. Because here's the thing,
there are many situations in which snow
actually does appear to be black. I
mean, most notably at night. Um much of
the time that snow exists, snow is
black, or at least it would look black
to us. Um, of I mean, of course, snow
can take on an endless variety of colors
depending on the circumstances. It may
look white or black or blue or red. Um,
so you know, on if you accept a kind of
more standard theory of truth, it looks
like what you really should say is that
the the proposition snow is white is
strictly speaking false. Um, it's it's
only white sometimes. Now, one key
feature of the nondeception theory of
truth is that we we don't need to take
it that propositions are in any sense,
you know, mirroring the world. When we
say sentences like snow is white, this
this statement comes with a great deal
of like background contextual
understanding such as how whiteness
manifests during night. So, you know, we
we kind of have this background
understanding that, oh, white a white
thing may look black or maybe even just
be black in certain situations such as
at night. Um, the belief that snow is
white is not actually incompatible with
the belief that snow is black at night.
And most people hold both beliefs
without any kind of conflict or
problems. Um, because here's the thing,
they're not deceived by their belief
that snow is white. So, it's true.
They're not deceived by the belief that
snow is black at night. So that's true
too. So I mean the non-deception theory
here might be might be more open to
something like dialtheism. The view that
there are true contradictions. You know
maybe there can be two propositions with
contradictory content. But it need not
be the case that either of them is
deceptive. The defender of the
nondeception theory doesn't have to say
this. But I'm I'm just sort of pointing
out you know there's a way of looking at
this where on the non-deception theory
that kind of view might actually be
quite natural. Um, so that's one point
to consider. Um, all right, just a quick
advert. [music] Um, if you want to
support the channel, I do have a uh a
Patreon. There's um a whole bunch of
bonus videos available on the Patreon.
Um, so, you know, I mean, if you want
access to that, then, you know, chuck me
some money. Uh, I also have a PayPal if
you just want to, you know, send me some
cash. Obviously, these videos, you know,
they do take a lot of time to uh
research and to put together and
everything. So, um it really helps.
Anything you can uh if if you can offer
some cash to help me get by, then it
helps keep the channel going. So, let's
get back to um to the nondeception
theory. I just want to consider some
some further features of the uh the
non-deception theory of truth. So, one
thing that the non-deception theory
certainly appears to be committed to is
the idea that truth is gradable. Um,
some objects will be closer to the truth
than other objects. Objects may be more
or less approximately true, right? So,
there's so so there's going to be a kind
of spectrum of truth. Um, so take the
example of um salt water in the glass.
This does not quench thirst. So, we
might say, okay, it's not true water.
But the thing is with the salt water is
that it does fulfill many other socially
determined functions of water. And you
know it might be that quenching thirst
isn't particularly relevant anyway in
the context of chemistry for instance.
Maybe the salt water is true water
because chemists are more concerned with
you know the micro structure such as
like H2O molecules. They're more
concerned about that than they are about
quenching thirst.
The social conventions used to demarcate
things change as we interact more with
the world. So you know we make this
discovery that fresh water and seawater
are both composed of H2O and this micro
structure plays some sort of significant
role in um producing the manifest
properties of fresh water and seawater.
Um, we we know that both freshwater and
seawater play a similar role in
supporting living creatures, for
instance, and the the fact that they're
composed of H2O is what's playing that
role. As we focus more on understanding
what water is and the role that it plays
in the biosphere in general, the
property of being thirst quenching for
humans loses significance while the H2O
micro structure gains significance. So
you know salt water can then become sort
of more it's more true right um for an
extreme case of falsehood uh rules and
Dixon consider looking at a mirage um in
this case the only water related
property of the experience is the visual
experience or the visual appearance of
of water from a particular vantage point
and that's it right I mean there's a
visual appearance that's enough to make
somebody expect that they will find
something to quench their thirst. Um, on
the non-deception theory, maybe we can
legitimately say that the mirage is
literally water, but it's just very
false. You know, it's very far on the
false end. Actually, Rules and Dixon say
that the apparent water seen in a mirage
would be false to such a degree that it
should no longer be called water. So
they say, well, you know, when you get
to that point, when you get to that
degree of deception, it just doesn't
even count anymore as water. Um, but I I
don't think that that's something you
would have to say on the non-deception
theory. Um, what's important is that the
mirage certainly isn't true water. Uh,
salt water in the glass is truer than
the mirage. So like if I have a glass of
salt water, that's, you know, that's
that's truer. It's more true than what
the mirage is. Um because again, salt
water does in fact fulfill a whole bunch
of the socially determined functions of
water. At least it fulfills more of them
than than the mirage does. We often
speak of approximate truth with respect
to propositions. Of course, it's
difficult to work out the technical
details. Um but on the non-deception
theory, it easily captures this this
talk of things being approximately true,
more or less true because things may be
more or less deceptive. Um, I mean it's
it's hard actually to see how the
non-deception theory could avoid that
commitment. Um, so one thought that may
be had here is that the non-deception
theory implies a kind of relativism
about truth. So it seems that on the
non-deception theory, truth is going to
be relative to each individual because
whether something is deceptive is
obviously relative to each individual.
what is deceptive to me may not be
deceptive to you. Um because whether
something is deceptive is dependent on
background knowledge. I mean not
everybody is going to be deceived by a
mirage. Uh indeed for a person who's
very familiar with mirages, you might
actually start to notice that there are
in fact differences between seeing a
mirage and seeing water from a distance.
Like I I think I'm sure that with the
right kind of visual skills, a mirage
would no longer even look like water.
you'd just be able to look at it and be
like, "Oh, that's a mirage, right?
That's not that's not what, you know, a
genuine lake at that distance would look
like." Um, and of course, as we've
already seen with the chemistry example,
truth is going to change as our projects
change, as this modifies the socially
determined functions associated with
objects. So, to bring out this kind of
relativism clearly, consider two people
interacting with a fake door knob.
Sienna has built a doorway as part of a
theater set and she understands that
it's part of the set. So, she has no
expectations that the doorork knob will
open the door. She just sees it as part
of the set. So, the the doorway doesn't
even afford the possibility of opening.
Pearl, by contrast, has just visited the
stage and assumes that this is a doorway
to a different part of the theater. So,
the doorway is nondceptive to Sienna,
but deceptive to Pearl. So it seems the
doorway is true for Sienna and false for
Pearl. So it looks like we have a you
know pretty straightforward kind of
relativism here. Um now a lot of
philosophers are scared of relativism.
So you know we need to consider whether
they should be scared of this kind of
relativism. Is this a kind of relativism
that we need to you know we need to hide
under the covers when it when we see it
coming? Um well probably not. Um, I
mean, I think it could be argued that
there's still a kind of objectivity
available here. I mean, the thought
would be, look, if Pearl had been in
Sienna's position, if Pearl had learned
what Sienna already knows, then the
doorway would not have been deceptive to
Pearl, so would have been true for
Pearl. The doorway is false for Pearl
because Pearl lacks knowledge. But this
is knowledge that we might expect
anybody who is using the building should
have. I mean, people should be made
aware if the doorway is a fake stage
prop. Um, and certainly we can easily
teach Pearl these facts. Uh, so we can
ensure that she's no longer deceived. I
mean, there's a sense in which like once
everybody has been made aware of the
sort of facts that are relevant for the
kind of environment they're in, then you
start to see maybe not total
convergence, but much more convergence
in terms of what's going to be deceptive
to one person versus deceptive to
another. So, so the relativism sort of
gets tranquilized a little bit. So maybe
maybe we don't need to hide under the
covers and we can just live with this
degree of relativism. Um and maybe we
need to give it a different name. You
know, we'll call it some something else.
Uh maybe maybe start calling it
contextualism or something instead of
instead of using scary words like
relativism. Anyway, um I'll I want to
also note a couple of connections
between the non-deception theory and uh
a couple of other ideas.
First of all, um, conversational
implicature.
So, a distinction is sometimes drawn
between what a statement explicitly
asserts and what it merely implicates.
Uh, this idea comes from Paul Grace. Um,
so here's a classic example.
Verity says to Dia, "I'm out of petrol."
And Dileia responds, "Well, there's a
petrol station just around the corner.
Okay. So the thought is this. All that
Dia has asserted here is the location of
a petrol station. And on you know the
standard view of of truth
her statement is going to be true
provided there is in fact a petrol
station at that location.
But Dia's statement implicates that the
petrol station is open or at least that
she believes that the petrol station is
open. After all, if the petrol station
were closed, then the location of the
station is irrelevant given that the
context that Verity is looking for
petrol. Like when Verity says, "I'm out
of petrol." Right? What she's really
doing, I mean, she actually is
implicating something, too. She's
implicating, "Look, I I want to buy some
petrol. I need some petrol for my car."
Right? And so, and and when Dia
responds, there's a petrol station
around the corner. um given the
conversational context
that that also kind of carries this
additional meaning. It's not asserted.
It's not literally asserted. It's not
part of the literal semantic content of
the statement, but it has this
additional meaning that the petrol
station will be open and Verity will be
able to buy petrol there. So the
standard way of looking at this is if
the petrol station is closed and Dia
knows that the station is closed, she
has asserted something true. She's given
the true she's stated a true claim that
the petrol station is around the corner,
but she's implicated something false.
Her statement is misleading, but it's
still technically true.
Now, it's not so clear that on the
non-deception theory, we're going to
have the same sort of view of what's
going on here because on the
non-deception theory, it's not clear
that we will say that Dia has asserted
something true. It actually just looks
like what she said is is literally
literally false, right? Because when
when she says this statement, there's a
petrol station around the corner, that's
clearly deceptive and it's therefore
false in an important respect. The issue
is while there might be something around
the corner that appears as a petrol
station, in context, it's not a true
petrol station because it doesn't serve
the contextually socially determined
function of a petrol station being the
place where you buy petrol, right? Like
if the petrol station is closed, I can't
buy petrol there. So, it's not going to
count as a true petrol station in that
context because that's obviously the
function that matters here. Um, so
actually the proposition there's a
petrol station around the corner is just
not true. Even if it's even if you
interpret it like literally as a claim
about the location of a petrol station,
um, it it just isn't true. It isn't true
because it's not a true petrol station.
Um so we don't need any distinction here
between what is asserted and what is
implicated. Even if you just take what's
asserted, DIA's statement is false. Um
so maybe you don't need this distinction
in the same sort of way. Um
on the other hand, if you consider a
statement like you know when Barbara
heard the rumor she exploded. Well, we
know that people do not literally
explode, so we assign a different
meaning, namely that Barbara became
angry. Again, on the standard view, the
statement is literally false, but
implicates something true. The
non-deception theory, on the other hand,
um well, we have this understanding that
people don't literally explode in the
sense they don't suddenly burst outward
in a ball of fire. So, the statement is
not it's not deceptive. So, maybe you
just say it's straightforwardly true.
But it's yeah I mean it might be that um
you know theories of conversational
implicature um perhaps that whole
distinction is just not necessary on the
non-deception theory. I think also the
non-deception theory has potentially
interesting applications to generic
generalizations.
So consider statements such as um dogs
have four legs or ducks lay eggs or
sperm fertilize eggs.
So the statement dogs have four legs is
true despite the fact that some dogs do
not have four legs. Um ducks lay eggs is
true even though it applies only to some
of the adult members of one sex. um
sperm fertilize eggs is true, but
actually only a tiny minority of sperm
fertilize eggs. So, so we have a rather
odd situation here where the statement
sperm fertilize eggs is true, but the
statement sperm usually fertilize eggs
is clearly false. What's going on here?
So, these sorts of statements are called
generic generalizations. And there's a
great deal of debate about how generic
generalizations uh should be analyzed.
Um, now one view you could have is that
uh contrary to our initial inclinations,
none of these statements are true after
all. But then of course we'd have to
account for why we're initially inclined
to regard them as true. But I want to
point out on the non-deception theory,
it really does kind of look like there's
no deep mystery here, right? The
statement dogs have four legs is true
because it's non-deceptive. We accept
this statement while fully understanding
that there's a kind of idealization
involved.
Um and we might even say that this is
because a dog with only three legs is in
some respect not a true dog. I mean many
of the ways in which you know dogs um
dogs sort of work for us requires them
to have four legs or at least they serve
their functions better when they have
four legs. So the generic statement is
talking about true dogs and therefore
doesn't concern three-legged dogs. Um
but anyway, the important point is just
it it looks like actually people can
accept both the statement dogs have four
legs and the statement some dogs do not
have four legs without really any sense
of conflict and without either statement
creating any problems with our
interactions with the world. Both of
these statements lead to the right sorts
of expectations. Um I mean there's an
interesting psychological question about
why it is we can do this but at least
with respect to truth value again
there's there's very little mystery
here. Neither of these statements is
deceptive. Um
so you know I mean we might say look
there are there are these situations
where um you know the non-deception
theory of truth sheds some sort of
interesting light or perhaps has some
kind of interesting application to um
our understanding of propositions. Um
okay then. So Rolls and Dixon present
another uh account of truth that is very
similar to the non-deception theory and
this is the uh trustworthiness theory of
truth which they say derives from the
Hebrew Bible.
So this theory says X is true if and
only if X is trustworthy. X is false if
and only if X is untrustworthy.
X can be any proposition uh any object
at all. It can be a proposition or a
non-proposition. And it really I mean it
should be clear how this extends to the
examples we've already given. A true
chair is a chair that can be trusted to
support one's weight. Um rules and Dixon
state the theory as follows. A thing is
true when it can be trusted to fulfill
its functions or uses. So on their
interpretation uh it it need not be
demonstrated that the chair actually
does do this. A chair can be true even
if nobody has ever actually sat on it.
Um it's just just as long as the chair
is actually trustworthy.
Or if you take a proposition like snow
is white. This can be trusted in your
dealings with the world. It leads you to
form the right sort of expectations
about what you find when you encounter
snow. Snow is black on the other hand
can't be trusted. Um at least not in
many many contexts. Uh now I mean you
might be wondering whether the
trustworthiness theory is actually
different from the non-deception theory.
I mean clearly these theories have a lot
in common. Uh and you might say well
surely what it is to be trustworthy is
just what it is to be non-deceptive.
Like aren't these the same thing? I
think there may be a useful distinction
here though um for a couple of reasons.
So the trustworthiness theory might
allow for a greater degree of
objectivity of truth. Um you know we saw
that the non-deception theory has this
element to it where it seems seems to
sort of be hospitable to relativism and
and perhaps the trustworthiness theory
is a little less hospitable. So consider
again the stage door case. The stage
door is not deceptive to Sienna but it's
certainly deceptive to Pearl. But we may
say that for both Sienna and Pearl, the
door is not trustworthy. So, it's not a
true door. And maybe that's what we want
to say, you know? I mean, we want to say
that it's not a true door, even if
Sienna isn't deceived by it. Whether
something is deceptive is very
sensitive, perhaps too sensitive to
specific facts about our understanding
and our goals. But it's not that doesn't
seem to be quite so the so much the case
for trustworthiness.
Um, it looks like actually what we have
here is a shift towards a more normative
theory of truth. The stage door is
deceptive to Pearl, not deceptive to to
Sienna. And that's that. We have a
straightforward description of the ways
in which these individuals form
expectations related to the stage door.
Pearl will be surprised when she tries
to open it. Sienna won't even try to
open it. On the other hand, the key
point about the trustworthiness theory
is you ought not to trust that door. And
because you ought not to trust that
door, the door is not true. And that we
ought not to trust the door is a
normative claim. It's it's independent
from the descriptive facts about our
psychological states. Right? Whether
we're deceived by the door, that's just
a descriptive fact about people's
psychology. Whether we ought to trust
the door is a normative question.
Even if everybody on the planet
understood that the door was fake, it
would still be true that we ought not to
trust it, right? So it would still be
that it isn't a true door. So this seems
to avoid making truth uh relative to any
given individual. Still, I mean, the
nond the the the trustworthiness theory
is very similar to the non-deception
theory and and much of what was said
about the non-deception theory will uh
carry over to the trustworthiness
theory. So, instead of exploring the
trustworthiness theory in any greater
detail, I want to turn to a third theory
of non-propositional truth. This theory
is not discussed by Rules and Dixon. Um,
and I I think it's a little bit
different from the theories that they
propose, but I it has some potentially
interesting features.
I'm calling it the teological theory of
truth. I'm not sure who if anybody has
defended this theory of truth. Maybe it
should be credited to Cain Baker. Um I'd
guess somebody probably has proposed
something very much like this. So I I
very much doubt I'm the first person to
come up with this. But uh as with the
trustworthiness theory, this is a
thoroughly normative theory of truth. Um
indeed the basic idea of the teological
theory of truth is that truth is a
matter of meeting some sort of normative
ideal. So in a nutshell what we would
say is X is true if and only if X is an
ideal instance of its kind and X is
false if and only if X is a defective
instance of its kind. So one idea that
came up in the previous theories of
truth was that objects have certain
functions and they're true if they serve
those functions. This is also the basis
of the teological theory of truth. The
teological theory takes takes function
purpose to be to be fundamental to
reality. Right? There's a there's a kind
of way that things ought to be. There's,
you know, each kind of thing has a a
purpose that it ought to serve and this
fixes what the truth is. And so this is
going to be easiest to apply for objects
that have clearly defined functions,
right? Like a we might say that a true
heart is a heart that efficiently pumps
blood because the heart the function of
the heart is to pump blood. That's what
a heart is for. um you know the heart
was perhaps not literally designed but
you know even on the evolutionary theory
there are many philosophers who would
say that you can still you know within a
kind of Darwinian framework see that
there was a specific function that this
thing evolved to serve um it evolved to
perform a function and so the function
of the heart is to pump blood um a true
heart is a heart that does this
effectively simply a heart that does it
ideally. Similarly, true wings are wings
that support flight or that regulate
temperature or whatever it whatever else
it was that wings evolved to do. Right?
So note that this entails that in order
to say whether some object of type X is
a true X, we need to specify the kind of
thing the X is. And that kind of that
kind each kind is taken to have a
purpose a goal you know a tlos
um but crucially we might say that on
the teological theory there's no such
thing as something being true period
some something can only be a true such
and such right so there's it's not you
know it's not so much that a heart is
true period that when you when you look
at a heart when you take that object the
point is it's a true heart because a
heart is something that has this
specially defined function um this
specially defined purpose and this
object is serving that purpose
correctly.
So this theory is going to naturally
extend to um to speech acts like if I
hit my hand with a hammer and I I scream
like ah right well what's going on there
is the purpose of this is to express
pain and it succeeds at doing so. So,
it's true, right? It's a true expression
of pain. Or consider something like an
act of naming, right? Let's say that,
you know, there's a ship in the dockyard
and I say, I dub this ship the
Purlington.
Well, this only succeeds as an act of
naming in very specific conditions. I
need to have the right kind of relation
to the ship. I mean, I need to own the
ship. Um, otherwise, the act of naming
is false.
Um, of course, if you take this
literally as a report of what you're
doing, like when I say I I dubbed this
ship the Purlington, ordinarily you
might say, I don't know, it's maybe
neither true nor false or it's or it's
just always going to be true. Um but
again on on this kind of theory no like
there's a specific function purpose
that's being served by this statement
and whether this statement serves that
purpose effectively is going to be
dependent on you know you um meeting
certain specific conditions like owning
the ship legally
or consider commands right the statement
of a command presupposes the possibility
of fulfilling the command. When I say
please pass the salt, this is true if
there is in fact salt and I am in a
context where it makes sense to request
that the salt be passed. For instance,
if there's another person who is capable
of passing the salt, otherwise it's
false.
So propositions such as snow is white
will be true when they satisfy the you
know the relevant norm. Um there are
different circumstances in which we
state propositions but a common context
is that we use them to help predict and
explain our experience with the world.
Uh and so as we noted previously the
proposition snow is white leads us to
form the right kind of expectations
about what we find when we encounter
snow. Uh snow is white can similarly be
used in explanations uh like what's the
explanation for snow blindness? That's
going to appeal to the fact that snow is
white. Um, now of course snow in fact
has many colors as we said um any color
at all really depending on the context.
But in most circumstances it's not
particularly useful to say snow is snow
is blue or snow is black or snow is red.
That's going to introduce needless
complexity. So it would violate norms of
conversation and norms of inquiry to
rattle off propositions like that. A
proposition counts as true when it is
ideal given the norms of the
conversation or the norms of the
inquiry.
Um actually uh it's worth noting an
interesting connection to um to like
pragmatism here. Uh as we saw in the
pragmatist video, Pers's view that a
proposition is view is that the
proposition is true just in case it
would be accepted at the ideal end of
inquiry if I inquiry were to continue
for as long as possible. So he's
defining truth in terms of what we would
say in ideal circumstances. you know,
certain propositions force themselves
onto our minds and there may be
different reasons for this. Um, but you
know, we got to look at the at those
propositions that are kind of forced
upon us in these ideal circumstances.
Um, and that's pretty similar to what
the teological theory is going to say
about um propositional truth. But of
course, the teological theory just
generalizes this beyond propositions. Um
so you know we might think that this
sort of Percian uh you know propositions
true ideal end of inquiry kind of idea
is getting at something but is is only
getting a small aspect of what truth is
and that actually this truth as ideal
can apply to things other than
propositions.
Okay. Um so arguably uh the the
teological theory avoids the relativism
of the non-deception theory. Recall
again the stage door example given the
kind of thing that this door is namely a
prop for a stage actually isn't
defective at all. So in fact that door
is true. Um, indeed, the very fact that
it might appear to be a real door, the
very fact that it can deceive people in
this way is exactly part of what allows
it to serve its function so well. It's a
true prop door, and as such, it's true
for Sienna and true for Pearl. Um, you
know, maybe Pearl doesn't realize that
the door is true, but that's cuz Pearl
is mistaken about the kind of thing that
it is. Um so notice also the the
distinction here between the teological
theory and the trust and the
trustworthiness theory. On the
trustworthiness theory the most
plausible view is that the stage door is
false for both Sienna and Pearl because
it appears to be a door but ought not to
be trusted as such. On the teological
theory again you have to consider what
the object was designed to do what the
object is for. And um the prop door was
never designed to be a a door that opens
in the first place. So that's not its
function. So it's it is true on the
teological theory.
And as with the previous theories, this
has uh again an interesting application
to generic generalizations. When I say
dogs have four legs, we have to think of
this as fundamentally a normative claim.
It's a claim about what dogs are, but
more than this, it's a claim about what
it is to be a good dog uh or a healthy
dog. Some dogs do not have four legs.
But such dogs are defective, right? Like
and even if the majority of dogs were to
fail to have four legs, like let's say
that by some cosmic accident, every dog
loses a leg. Well, it would still be
true that dogs have four legs because
this is how dogs ought to be. Uh on the
teological theory, a true dog is a dog
that has four legs. There's an
interesting consequence here that on the
teological theory, arguably the generic
generalization, dogs have more legs,
dogs have four legs, is in some sense
more true than what we would ordinarily
think of as the more accurate statement
that most dogs have four legs but some
do not. Right? So normally we think that
the statement dogs have four legs is a
kind of approximation of the more
accurate statement that most dogs have
four legs but some do not. But on the
teological theory, that's kind of
backwards because the apparently more
precise descriptions are somewhat
misleading in the sense that they
obscure what it is to be a dog with
these kind of irrelevant empirical
details. Um, so it's like, yeah, I mean,
yeah, I mean, there's some dogs that
don't have four legs, but they're like,
again, they're they're sort of defective
or deviant in some way, and you're not
really getting at what the essence of
the dog is uh when you say that. Now,
there's an obvious worry about the
teological theory of truth, which is how
exactly does this theory account for
lying? I may say things that are not
true with the intent to deceive. But if
my aim is to deceive and I say something
that's not true and then most people
believe me, it seems that I have
successfully fulfilled my aims. So my
statement has served its intended
function
which means on the teological theory
I've stated something true. So, you
know, when I say that I did not steal
the cookies, well, as long as everyone
believes I didn't steal the cookies, my
statement's true. Even though I know
that I actually did steal the cookies,
my statement is true because it serves
my aim. It serves the function, right?
So um in response to this uh I I think
that the I suppose a kind of obvious
move for the defender of teological
theory is to is to look at this in terms
of when we assess the truth of you know
statements propositions we're assessing
it in terms of the aims and norms of
social interaction. Um the teological
theory accepts this explicitly normative
view of of of reality, right? And
generally speaking, lying is bad. Um a
lie may fulfill your personal aims but
frustrate other more important aims. Um
so I mean think about like a Canian
point of view on this. You know that the
Canian would say, "Look, a convention
where everybody lies whenever it would
benefit them would would be self-
undermining because in a world where
people lie whenever it would benefit
them, nobody would trust anything anyone
says. And that would mean that a lie
could never work. It could never
convince anyone because in order for a
lie to work, people have to trust you."
So, there's a kind of self- undermining
thing going on when you lie. Um, and so
if you if you have a view like that,
then you're going to think that, okay,
um, lying is is a bad thing, right? um
lying. Yeah, I mean it may in some sense
serve your personal aims. Um but it's
certainly going to violate these more
general norms of conversation, norms of
interaction and um you know your kind of
ethical responsibilities
um and perhaps it in also is going to
even if you think it serves your
personal aims well maybe maybe it
doesn't. I mean maybe your sort of
personal aims are actually like tied up
in some kind of way with uh you know
with what these more general norms are
right the the idea that a person can
just act completely in their own
self-interest without concern for anyone
else is something that is at least
somewhat controversial among uh you know
so so you might actually just reject
that idea and say no I mean like you
know we are all sort of social beings
and our fates are intertwined right and
uh maybe what it is to to be a person to
be a self is constituted by our
interactions with others and etc etc
right
I'm not going to fill out the details
here but hopefully you can see how a
defender of the theory might try to fill
this out and so what you can say is
when you we have this condition on the
teological theory that X is true if and
only if X is ideal right but that
doesn't necessarily mean ideal for me Um
maybe the way that we fill out that is
if you know like maybe we're we're kind
of objectivists about normativity and we
think no there are certain objective
norms and you know the norms that you
have to follow are those norms those are
the ones that are relevant or even if
they're not objective I mean maybe
they're they're sort of socially
constructed and the norms that are
relevant when it comes to assessing the
truth of uh propositions and statements
are these social norms. So there are
options for the defender of the
teological theory here. Okay. So
we've just seen um three theories that
accommodate non-propositional truth.
None of these theories is obviously
incoherent. Um
and we might think that they all have
certain attractive features.
So the next question is whether there's
something in principle wrong with
postulating non-propositional truth. I
mean is there a good reason why analytic
philosophers have tended to ignore it?
So recall you know restriction and
non-relation. Restriction being the
claim that the only philosophically
important kind of truth is is
propositional truth. Non-relation being
the claim that non-propositional truth
is not relevantly related to
propositional truth. the theory of
propositional truth need not consider
non-propositional truth.
So is there some reason to accept these
positions and to reject the kind of
theories that we've just been looking
at? Um so here are some arguments that
might be used to defend these ideas. So
first first of all there's what I'm
calling the change of subject argument.
I kind of hinted at this at the
beginning. Um, it might be argued that
we're just dealing with different senses
of the term true. When we talk about
propositional truth, you know, it is
true that snow is white versus
non-propositional truth like a true
coin.
They're just different notions of truth.
We are dealing with literally different
words that happen to have the same
spelling. They're homonyms. um to give
the same theory of meaning of these
words would be like trying to give an
account that accommodates the shared
meaning of bank in riverbank and
financial bank. Uh it's just an
equivocation.
Now uh stated like this the argument
obviously begs the question because I
have just presented some theories of
truth uh on which there is no radical
distinction in meaning um in in which
you know the use of true with respect to
both propositions and non-propositional
objects um both of those uses of true
share important features
and none of these theories is obviously
crazy or incoherent. So it would be
inappropriate to just assume from the
outset that non-propositional truth is a
change of subject. That's something that
we can only assess once we've determined
which theory of truth is right. We can't
from the outset treat this as some sort
of inviable data point against which to
judge theories of truth. We we need some
sort of independent reason for thinking
that non-propositional truth changes the
subject. I mean one idea you might have
here is like well maybe we can just
appeal to grammar, right? Like so the
idea is is that true in the
propositional sense and true in the
non-propositional sense have different
linguistic roles, right? They're
different predicates. So we we can
legitimately say this. We can
legitimately say
it is true that snow is white.
Similarly, we can legitimately say this
is a true coin.
Very different statements, right? It
would not be legitimate to say it is
true that this coin. Similarly, it
wouldn't be legitimate to say this is a
true snow is white, right? So, I can say
it is true that snow is white, but I
can't say it is true that this coin. Um,
and this is just like this is just a
matter of grammar, right? Like there's a
difference in grammar here. So, of
course, these are actually different
predicates. Um, now I mean, of course,
it may be that the uh the difference
here is actually not so great because
just as I may say that this is a true
coin, I can say this is a true
proposition. um where where the
proposition I'm referring to is snow is
white. Um so actually maybe they do have
more similar grammar. But in any case um
the general response to this kind of
argument I think is fairly
straightforward. Even if these
grammatical differences can be
identified, this could just be an
idiosyncrasy of the English language. Um
what we're interested in here is in the
property that we're picking out with the
word true. We're not ultimately
interested in how English speakers use
the word true or the rules of the word
true in English. Um I mean the
difference in grammar may be explained
by the fact that in one case we're
stating a proposition and the other case
we're referring to an object. So what's
going on with the sentence this is a
true coin is that the word true modifies
a noun whereas the sentence snow is
white is not a noun. So naturally you
can't just substitute this for the word
coin. But all this shows is that English
grammar tracks a difference between, you
know, prepositions and other objects,
nouns and other thing. You know, that's
what's going on there. Um, it doesn't
follow that there's any deep difference
with with respect um to like the
property of truth um when it comes to
propositions and and the property of
truth when it comes to objects. Um, and
anyway, of course, uh, different
languages are going to have different
grammars here. So you know I mean it's
it seems very unlikely that any
idiosyncrasy of English grammar is going
to be replicated across all the other
languages. Um all right so another
argument is the reducibility
argument.
Um okay according to this argument
language about non-propositional truth
is derivative from language about
propositional truth. The basic idea is
that when I talk of true gold or a true
friend really I'm expressing implicit
propositions. So verity is a true friend
means something like you know the sets
of propositions right verity is my
friend. Varity often helps me out when
I'm in need. If I tell verity a secret
she keeps it in confidence and so on.
And those propositions
are true or false in the standard sense.
These are just these are just
propositions that are true or false. So
that phrase true friend can be kind of
decomposed into these propositions. Um
and and we can always translate
non-propositional truth into sets of
propositions like this. Um we can
eliminate the non-propositional use of
true. Um this kind of move might be
favored by a sort of simplicity style
argument. You know appeal to Okam's
razor. Uh so the idea is look all of the
content of non-propositional truth can
be restated in propositional form and we
should favor a simpler semantic theory
that does not postulate more types of
truth than are required to explain the
data. I'm slightly modifying uh rules
and Dixon's uh statement of the
reducibility argument. Uh they have a
kind of version of this argument. I'm
putting it in slightly different terms.
Um so premise one there are various
contexts where a propositional sense of
truth is required. Premise two, if a
sense of truth is reducible to another
more literal sense of truth, then this
less literal sense is not
philosophically important. Premise
three, non-propositional senses of truth
are reducible to propositional senses of
truth. Conclusion, so non-propositional
senses of truth are not philosophically
important.
Does this work? Well, first of all, um,
again, as as stated, you know, stated
like this, the argument is question
begging because it assumes that the
truth theories on offer above are just
off the table, right? Like obviously if
we accept any of the truth theories that
I presented earlier, then we will say
that in fact it's propositional truth
that is reducible to non-propositional
truth. the truth of a proposition can be
cashed out in terms of properties that
are shared by non-propositional objects.
Um and indeed you know like the truth of
propositions is just a kind of
derivative special case of this of this
kind of truth.
Um so the critic of non-propositional
truth will again need to give some
further reason why we have to treat it
as reducible to propositional truth.
What here's one idea about this right?
So one idea is you know a key point
about propositional truth is that it has
been incorporated into formal logic. Um
propositional truth is simple well
behaved. It's it's subject to logical
analysis that has provided a great deal
of clarity about how it works. Um for
instance propositional truth obeys the T
schema. Um P is true if and only if P.
Um certainly you know it looks like we
would have to give up the tea schema if
we get on board with these
non-propositional theories. It wouldn't
make sense to say you know coin is true
if and only if coin right. Um similarly
formal logic has revealed patterns of
truth preservation for propositional
truth. Um and propositional truth has a
variety of formal applications such as
the truth conditional theories of
meaning. And this is why we should favor
reducing non-propositional truth to
propositional truth. Propositional truth
just performs better in terms of sort of
I don't know theoretical virtues
whatever.
I do wonder though whether it whether
propositional truth really is so much
better behaved. Um I mean for one thing
it's not so obvious that the truth
values in logic have to be interpreted
in terms of propositional truth. um the
I mean truth values in logic are
assigned to propositions but as we saw
even on theories that allow you know
even on these non-propositional theories
the truth property can be assigned to
propositions in fact all three of the
theories we looked at allow you to
assign a truth property to propositions.
So suppose then that we just take the
truth values in logic and you know we
interpret them as as follows. If we just
say we have the value non-deceptive and
the value deceptive and then we take
non-deceptive as the designated value.
Well, you can then just it seems like
you can just have you know the you can
set up the truth tables in the same way
you always did before, right? I mean uh
here are the truth val truth tables for
the logical connectives. Um, I mean this
is just the same it it's doing the same
thing as uh as true and false, right? We
just use non-deceptive and deceptive and
plug plug those in to to do the same
thing as what true and false were doing.
Um, and of course [clears throat] on
this kind of view it actually would just
be true and false. Um, right? But I'm
I'm just saying there's an interpret the
truth tables in themselves do not fix
what our interpretation of truth is. um
is the point. Um clearly you can take
true and interpret that to mean
non-deceptive or you can take false and
interpret that to mean deceptive and you
can set up the truth tables in the same
way. Um in any case, one thing that's
worth bearing in mind here is that
non-propositional truth has not been
developed in any detail in contemporary
philosophy. It's hardly surprising that
we have, you know, sophisticated formal
theories of propositional truth given
that that's where all of our effort has
been directed. Um, so it's kind of just
premature to dismiss non-propositional
truth for this reason. I mean, one might
say, okay, well, let's give it, you
know, like 50 years of people, you know,
like maybe there can be some sort of
truth conditional theory of meaning that
employs some sort of non-propositional
truth theory for that purpose. and then
we're going to have like some really
sophisticated theory that we get out of
that. Let's see what happens. Right?
A [clears throat] second issue with the
reducibility argument is that even if
non-propositional truth is reducible to
propositional truth, um
it's not obvious that non-propositional
truth is not philosophically important.
Um
so I just got to take a drink.
I suppose a,
you know, a um a professional YouTuber
would edit this kind of thing out, but I
don't care.
All right. So, the second issue with the
reducibility argument is that even if
non-propositional truth is reducible to
propositional truth, it's not obvious
that non-propositional truth is not
philosophically important.
For one thing, any theory of
propositional truth is going to have to
make sense of the derivative
non-propositional truth. It's going to
have to allow for a kind of
non-propositional truth that reduces to
propositional truth. And that imposes a
significant constraint on your truth
theory. So by analogy, suppose you are a
physicalist who says that qualia are
reducible to physical states. Well, that
claim imposes a significant constraint
on your theory of mind which is not
going to be shared by all physicalists
because some physicists will just deny
that there are qualia, right? And so in
some sense their their theory is like
less constrained. You know their theory
of like okay how the brain produces the
mind is going to be less constrained
because they don't have to account for
the reduction of qualia to brain states.
So even if qualia are reducible,
they are still philosophically
significant. Um I mean that's I think in
the case of qualia that's just really
very obvious. I mean like I think
everybody in philosophy of mind would
accept that like yeah if you believe in
qualia and you think that qualia are
irreducible then you know you've got
phil like there's philosophical work
that you've got to do and there's
constraints on the kind of philosophical
theory you're going to be able to
forward and and this is this is a
significant claim that you are making um
[clears throat]
I mean I suppose there are some people
who say that qualia are like
unintelligible or whatever so maybe you
wouldn't say it's significant in the
sense that it means anything but it's
still like you know you are at least
attempting to make a commitment um
that's not going to be shared by the
physicist who denies who just straight
up denies Qualia. So, as long as we're
accepting that there is
non-propositional truth, if we're saying
that it's reducible to propositional
truth, it looks like there's actually
still going to be constraints imposed on
our truth theory
that we have to account for.
[clears throat]
Okay. So another argument against
non-propositional truth is the
entailment argument which is perhaps
similar to the previous argument in that
it rests on the sort of role of truth in
logic. But the objection here is that
non-propositional truth cannot account
for entailment relations.
All right. So consider the claim snow is
white.
Now recall that on the non-deception
theory of truth, we said that this is
true because it is not deceptive.
But it's also the case that snow is
sometimes black. So we can accept that
snow is white despite accepting snow is
sometimes black. So we accept snow is
white. We accept no black things are
white. At least you know at the same
time in the same respect. Nothing
nothing is both black all over and white
all over. So no black things are white.
And we also accept at night snow is
black. So snow is white. No black things
are white. At night snow is black. All
right. Well, now we are involved in a
straightforward logical contradiction.
As we saw, the non-deception theory
might not be so concerned about this.
Um, you know, the non-deception theory
might say that all these statements are
indeed true. And here's the thing. What
we don't do on this theory is we're not
going to derive the statement snow is
both white and not white.
So it seems like what we're comm you
know we've committed ourselves to
statements which clearly entail that
snow is both white and not white but we
just don't derive that. And you know
hasn't something just obviously gone
wrong here? Um, you know, like clearly,
you know, I mean, snow is white. No
black things are white. That logically
entails snow is not black. If we're
saying that at night snow is black, then
it we're just committed to saying that
snow is not white. It's it's some it's
it's both white and not white, right?
Um,
so we have an entailment here which is
just not being made. To say that snow is
both white and not white would be
deceptive. We don't accept that, right?
But we're just not we're just refusing
to make the we're just refusing to kind
of follow that logical entailment. So
the general point is this. It may be
that some proposition P logically
entails Q, but that P is nondeceptive
while Q is deceptive. So P logically
entails Q, but P is true while Q is
false. But that's nonsensical because to
say that P entails Q is to say that it's
impossible that P is true and Q is
false. when P logically entails Q, the
truth of P gu guarantees the truth of Q.
And the non-deception theory doesn't
accommodate this. So the the problem
with the non-deception theory is is that
it just doesn't accommodate these
entailment relations. Um now in this
particular case, it's not going to help
much to say, well maybe we'll develop a
more sophisticated formal theory of
non-propositional truth in the future
because the issue is well we have a
counter example on the table, right? Um
these counter examples reveal a
fundamental difference between
prophecies like deceptiveness and the
property of truth and no amount of you
know theoretical development is going to
overcome that. Um I mean I've framed
this in terms of the deception theory
but the same argument might be made for
uh for the other for the other theories.
Um
so uh you know I mean the point here is
just look if you're giving a theory of
propositional truth then you don't you
shouldn't even consider this
non-propositional stuff because
propositional truth is governed by
entailment relations non-propositional
truth truth property can't accommodate
that. So non-propositional truth is just
a completely separate sort of thing.
So one obvious move in response to this
is to insist that the nonpropositional
truth theory actually does preserve
entailment relations despite initial
appearances. So in the snow is white
case, we might hold that actually snow
is white is deceptive after all because
snow sometimes appears black. Or we
might hold that the statement, you know,
at night snow is black is deceptive
because perhaps snow is still white at
night and what we are inclined to call
black here is just that's just how
whiteness appears at night. Um so you
can make these kinds of, you know, these
these moves where you you try to
preserve uh the entailment relations,
right? Um what what you can always do is
make these adjustments so that you don't
end up counting as non-deceptive any set
of statements that would entail a
logical contradiction.
um or at least you know you know nothing
where you want to say okay well P
entails Q right P is P is non-deceptive
um Q is deceptive right you just you in
principle you can always just deny that
P is deceptive or deny that Q is
deceptive right that that is always
going to be open to you um it may be
somewhat unnatural and look somewhat ad
hoc but you could make that move um
another option of course is for the
defender of non-propositional truth
truth to just deny logical entailment.
Um what they can say is that logical
entailment is a kind of idealization. Um
and there are already arguments from
within the framework of propositional
truth that treat logical entailment as
an idealization. So you can see my
videos on logical nihilism and uh could
there be no logic? Um which at least
purport to show that there are
counterexamples to every purported law
of logic that strictly speaking no
proposition ever entails another. there
are various contexts where it's useful
for us to talk and think as if there
were entailment relations. Um now of
course this kind of position is just
going to be completely unpolatable to um
to most philosophers. So uh but you know
I mean the the point is is look there is
a kind of anti-realism about logic that
is independently motivated right it's
not like this is just an ad hoc move to
save the non-propositional truth theory
I mean there are independent reasons for
thinking that no you know I mean like we
should just be kind of anti-realists
about logical entailment um we should
treat it as a as a form of as an
idealization
um and of course if you have that view
then this is just um you know this is
just not a
I will include uh a link in the comments
to my videos on uh logical nihilism and
and that stuff. All right. So
a final argument is what rules and Dixon
call the epistemic uselessness argument.
The basic idea of this is that with
respect to truth in philosophy,
epistemic interests are primary. Um so
uh you the thought is you know truth is
the the aim of belief. A belief
represents something as being true, the
world as being a particular way. So when
we inquire whether or not um beliefs are
reasonable, we're looking for evidence
pertaining to whether the world is that
way. You know, we're asking what do you
think the facts are and why do you think
this? And we label beliefs true when we
think that the propositional content of
those beliefs adequately matches the
world. In talk of truth, our interests
are epistemic. And that's particularly
clear in the domain of philosophy
because one of the central concerns of
philosophy is to determine what the
world is like and what justification we
have for our beliefs. So this leads to
the following argument. So premise one,
if an account of truth is not
epistemically is not epistemically
useful, then it is not philosophically
useful. Premise two, an account of
propositional truth is not epistemically
useful. Premise three, an account of
propositional truth is therefore not uh
philosophically useful. Um, premise
four, senses of truth from
philosophically useless accounts are not
philosophically important. And so the
conclusion is that non-propositional
sense of truth is not philosophically
important.
Okay. So there are several concerns
about this kind of argument. First of
all, it's not clear that we should agree
that epistemic interests are the primary
concern of philosophy. Um, there are
many different views about the aim of
philosophy. It's very controversial that
philosophy aims at truth in any sense.
Um, many philosophers would say that
philosophy is fundamentally concerned
more with, I don't know, ethical
questions such as what it is to live a
good life. Or perhaps the point of
philosophy is to explore ideas and
resist dogmatism, to present new
theories and arguments that challenge
assumptions that have long been taken
for granted. Um, philosophy is more
about opening up new ways of thinking
than settling on the truth. On either of
these views, epistemic interests are
subordinate to a different goal.
Moreover, it seems clear that philosophy
can investigate basically any topic and
in many cases epistemic concerns may not
be fundamental in that domain. So think
about philosophy of emotion, philosophy
of art, the meaning of life and so on.
The fact is even if philosophy itself is
an epistemic inquiry, philosophy does
not investigate only the epistemic. It
investigates anything. I mean, it would
be insur absurd to insist that since
philosophy is an epistemic inquiry,
therefore, philosophers of emotion must
only propose theories of emotion
according to which emotions serve some
sort of epistemic function. No
philosophers
of I I just dropped my little recording
device. Um, so no, philosophers of
emotions simply want to know what
emotions are. Assuming that emotions are
epistemic would illegitimately import
the features of the discipline itself to
the thing that the discipline is
studying.
So we might say the same about truth.
Second point as rules and Dixon note is
that it's questionable that only
propositional knowledge is epistemically
useful. There's a distinction between
knowing that so that is knowing that
certain propositions are true and
knowing how which refers to skills,
abilities, dispositions. knowing the
truth of a set of propositions about how
a bicycle works um and you know about
how the human body interacts with a
bicycle. None of that's going to confer
upon me the ability to ride a bike. In
order to do that, I need to physically
interact with the bike in the right kind
of way, training my muscles what to do.
In fact, part of learning a skill or
ability like this is learning not to
think. Like when you initially start
trying to ride a bike, you're going to
be consciously attending to what your
body is doing. But over time that gets
pushed behind the conscious veil and
eventually you just jump on a bike
without even thinking about how to do
it. And if you do start thinking about
how to do it, it can actually kind of
throw you off, right? So knowing how to
ride a bike is a distinct kind of
knowledge that at face value appears to
be non-propositional.
uh then the suggestion is well this
knowing how content such as knowing how
to ride a bike can literally be true and
if such content can be true then it is
epistemically useful and of course on
the non-propositional truth theories
elaborated earlier in the video it will
turn out that this content can be true
and true in just the same sense as
propositional content for instance when
I'm attempting to ride the bike I may
misjudge my own abilities perhaps the
environment looks like it would be easy
to ride in but actually requires much
more skill ill than I actually possess.
So there's non-propositional content
here that's deceptive and therefore it
counts as literally false on the
deception theory of truth. When I
attempt to ride a bike and everything
goes smoothly, the non-propositional
content is literally true. Um so you
know again if you accept one of these
other theories, you're going to say no.
I mean um there is non-propositional
content that is epistemically useful.
Um right well that's it. That's the end
of that video. Um, I hope you found that
interesting and I will see you all next
time. Goodbye for now.