Documentation Index
Fetch the complete documentation index at: /llms.txt
Use this file to discover all available pages before exploring further.
Skip to main content
Phoenix home page
Search...
⌘KAsk Assistant
Phoenix Cloud
Phoenix Cloud
Search...
Navigation
Overview: Tracing
Overview: Tracing
Documentation
Integrations
SDK & API Reference
Self-Hosting
Phoenix Cloud
Cookbooks
Release Notes
What is Arize Phoenix?
Get Started
Quick Start
Coding Agents
End to End Features Notebook
Phoenix Demo
PXI Agent
Tracing
Tutorial
Overview: Tracing
Overview
Projects
Sessions
Annotations
Metrics Dashboard
How-to: Tracing
Evaluation
Tutorial
Overview
LLM as a Judge
Client-Side Evals (SDK)
Server-Side Evals (UI)
Integrations
Datasets & Experiments
Tutorial
Overview: Datasets & Experiments
How-to: Datasets
How-to: Experiments
Prompts
Tutorial
Overview: Prompts
How to: Prompts
Settings
Access Control (RBAC)
API Keys
Secrets
Data Retention
Custom AI Providers
Sandboxes
Concepts
User Guide
Production Guide
Environments
Tracing
Prompts
Datasets & Experiments
Resources
Frequently Asked Questions
Contribute to Phoenix
Phoenix to Arize AX Migration
TypeScript SDK
Python SDK
Github
OpenInference
On this page
Features
Next Steps
Overview: Tracing
Overview: Tracing
Copy page
Tracing the execution of LLM applications using Telemetry
Copy page
Phoenix traces AI applications, via OpenTelemetry and has first-class integrations with LlamaIndex, LangChain, OpenAI, and others.
LLM tracing records the paths taken by requests as they propagate through multiple steps or components of an LLM application. For example, when a user interacts with an LLM application, tracing can capture the sequence of operations, such as document retrieval, embedding generation, language model invocation, and response generation to provide a detailed timeline of the request’s execution.
Tracing is a helpful tool for understanding how your LLM application works. Phoenix offers comprehensive tracing capabilities that are not tied to any specific LLM vendor or framework. Phoenix accepts traces over the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP) and supports first-class instrumentation for a variety of frameworks ( LlamaIndex, LangChain, DSPy), SDKs (OpenAI, Bedrock, Mistral, Vertex), and languages. (Python, TypeScript, etc.)
Using Phoenix’s tracing capabilities can provide important insights into the inner workings of your LLM application. By analyzing the collected trace data, you can identify and address various performance and operational issues and improve the overall reliability and efficiency of your system.
Application Latency: Identify and address slow invocations of LLMs, Retrievers, and other components within your application, enabling you to optimize performance and responsiveness.
Token Usage: Gain a detailed breakdown of token usage for your LLM calls, allowing you to identify and optimize the most expensive LLM invocations.
Runtime Exceptions: Capture and inspect critical runtime exceptions, such as rate-limiting events, that can help you proactively address and mitigate potential issues.
Retrieved Documents: Inspect the documents retrieved during a Retriever call, including the score and order in which they were returned to provide insight into the retrieval process.
Embeddings: Examine the embedding text used for retrieval and the underlying embedding model to allow you to validate and refine your embedding strategies.
LLM Parameters: Inspect the parameters used when calling an LLM, such as temperature and system prompts, to ensure optimal configuration and debugging.
Prompt Templates: Understand the prompt templates used during the prompting step and the variables that were applied, allowing you to fine-tune and improve your prompting strategies.
Tool Descriptions: View the descriptions and function signatures of the tools your LLM has been given access to in order to better understand and control your LLM’s capabilities.
LLM Function Calls: For LLMs with function call capabilities (e.g., OpenAI), you can inspect the function selection and function messages in the input to the LLM, further improving your ability to debug and optimize your application.
By using tracing in Phoenix, you can gain increased visibility into your LLM application, empowering you to identify and address performance bottlenecks, optimize resource utilization, and ensure the overall reliability and effectiveness of your system.
​
Features
Projects
Organize traces into separate projects for different applications
Sessions
Group related traces into conversations and user sessions
Annotations
Add feedback, labels, and scores to your traces
Metrics
Monitor latency, token usage, and error rates
​
Next Steps
Quickstart
Send your first traces to Phoenix
Concepts
Learn how traces and spans work
How-To Guides
Step-by-step tutorials for common tasks
Add Metadata & Tags
Enrich traces with custom attributes for filtering and analysis
Integrations
Connect LangChain, LlamaIndex, Anthropic, and 20+ frameworks
Manual Instrumentation
Add custom spans with decorators and wrappers
Run Evaluations
Score your traces with LLM-as-a-judge evaluators
Advanced Setup
Configure batching, gRPC, headers, and more
Was this page helpful?
YesNo
Suggest editsRaise issue
SessionsProjects
⌘I
Phoenix home page
English日本語 (Japanese)中文 (Chinese)
Powered byThis documentation is built and hosted on Mintlify, a developer documentation platform
Assistant
Responses are generated using AI and may contain mistakes.