Hey YouTube. So, I wanted to talk a
little bit about skepticism. I know, I
know, skepticism again. Um, well, I have
a video on a completely different topic
coming out quite soon. So, it's not all
going to be skepticism, but I did just
want to say a little bit about
skepticism, and it's something that I've
kind of mentioned a little bit in uh
recent videos, but I I just wanted to
elaborate on this idea. So in
contemporary philosophy, skepticism is
framed almost exclusively in terms of
it's framed as a claim about knowledge
or justification. So the skeptic is
taken to be asserting that we do not
know many of the things that we
ordinarily claim to know. Um most of our
ordinary knowledge claims are false. or
or she's taken to be saying that we are
not justified in believing many of the
ordinary many of the things we
ordinarily take ourselves to be
justified in believing. Um so uh classic
example of course is a proposition I
know that I have hands right the skeptic
is going to uh argue against that. Um no
you do not know that you have hands. Uh
so standard skeptical argument would
proceed by appealing to say a uh
skeptical hypothesis like the brain in
the vat hypothesis and the argument goes
if you do not know that you are not a
brain in a vat then you do not know that
you have hands you do not know that
you're not a brain in a vat so you don't
know that you have hands right the fact
that I uh cannot rule out the brain in a
vat hypothesis the fact that all of my
experiences are completely consistent
with my being a brain in a vat
um that is taken to show that uh you
know it is not appropriate to claim to
know that I have hands right the the the
term knowledge does not correctly apply
to the proposition that I have hands. So
um as I said this is how skepticism is
generally presented I I think in in
modern philosophy. Um but I want to
suggest a different way of thinking
about skepticism. Um because I think
that the
you know the way that we present it when
we present it in terms of like knowledge
and justification is useful for all
sorts of reasons but it is liable to be
a little bit misleading and I I I I
think that the real spirit of skepticism
is something a bit different. So to me
the spirit of skepticism isn't
necessarily anything to do with you know
claims about knowledge or justification.
It's more about um a kind of fairly deep
doubt or distrust or not taking
something too seriously. Um and this
doesn't necessarily have to have
anything to do with knowledge. So the
point as I see it is, you know, so what
the skeptic is driving at is they're
trying to push you to doubt, distrust,
not take too seriously the claim that
you have hands. Um, and you know,
whether you sort of say that you know
that you have hands is a little bit of a
tangent to that. So I think one way to
sort of see this different way of
thinking about skepticism is to consider
one of the um one of the popular
responses to skepticism externalism.
So according to externalists uh whether
a person's belief is justified depends
on factors that are external to that
person. Uh so the simplest kind of
externalism would be some sort of
reliableism right where a reliableist is
going to say okay in order for you to
know that some proposition is true you
need to have a true belief in that
proposition where that true belief was
produced by a reliable process and a
reliable process is a process that tends
to produce uh a good proportion of true
beliefs over false beliefs. So if you
take for instance the claim I have hands
right the reliabist will say yeah right
I do know that I have hands and the
reason why I know that I have hands is
that this is a belief which is true and
this belief has been produced by the
process of visual perception. Um and
visual perception is generally reliable.
Visual perception generally delivers
true beliefs. Now, so the key thing here
is that the the reliability of that
process, the reliability of visual
perception is not something that I need
to have any awareness of. The
reliability is just an objective fact
that's that might it's it's independent
of um uh or at least it's not
necessarily like part of my own internal
experience. Um, so I don't need to know
that visual perception is reliable in
order to know that I have hands in order
to know things on the basis of visual
perception. So if you if you take me and
my brain in a vat twin, you take, you
know, a brain that's exactly identical
to my brain, but there happens to be in
a vat. Well, presumably, uh, I mean,
arguably, um, these brains are going to
have the same mental state. So the
internal experience will be exactly the
same. Let's just grant that for the sake
of for the sake of illustrating this
point. So grant that the the internal
states are exactly the same. What the
reliability will say is
you know my beliefs are justified but my
brain and twins beliefs are not
justified. Um and the reason is just my
beliefs are in fact produced by this
reliable process. My brain and twins
beliefs are not produced by a reliable
process. So, so the key thing then is
that to know that P does not require
ruling out hypotheses that are
inconsistent with P. Uh, I can know that
I have hands even if I don't know that
I'm not a brain in a vat because it's
like, yeah, I mean, you know, my
internal experience is just as it would
be if I were a brain in a vat. But the
the thing is that's just that just
doesn't doesn't matter. I don't I don't
need to know that I'm not a brain in a
vat to know that I have hands. All that
matters is that it is in fact true that
I have hands and that belief was
produced by a reliable process. Now many
people have the intuition that
externalism just misses the point in
some way. Um that externalism is is
maybe in some deep way maybe question
begging um or it just sort of doesn't
kind of get what the skeptic is driving
at. And I think there is something to
this intuition. I have a video on
externalist responses to skepticism
where I try to uh elaborate various
different ways of making that intuition
a bit more precise.
Um but I think that you know I mean if
you if you take this view of skepticism
that I have suggested where skepticism
is not necessarily a claim about the
proper application conditions of the
term knowledge, right? but is instead a
claim about or it's it's instead like
trying to push you to deeply doubt, to
distrust, to stop taking certain things
seriously.
And in that way of thinking about
skepticism, um
it's it just is kind of obvious that
externalism is just powerless because
externalism does nothing nothing to
resolve the doubt. Like sure, if I
presuppose a whole bunch of stuff about
the external world and then I adopt a
reliableist uh account of knowledge,
um then I can indeed reject one of the
premises of that classic skeptical
argument, right? I I can reject the
premise that says if you don't know that
you're not a brain in a vat, you don't
know that you have hands.
So that's all very all well and good,
right? But
how does that help me if I'm if if as a
result of thinking about these skeptical
scenarios, I have been put into a state
of doubt. Because if I'm in a state of
doubt about whether there is anything,
whether things are as they appear to be,
then I'm also going to be in a state of
doubt about whether visual perception is
in fact a reliable process. I'm going to
be in a state of doubt about whether
visual perception does indeed deliver a
high proportion of true beliefs over
false beliefs. So I mean it's like yeah
you know I mean it's given the kind of
like point of view that the externalist
has sure you know you can you can adopt
that account of knowledge and you can
reject the premise of the skeptical
argument. You can resist the argument
that's all fine but it just doesn't
really seem to help at all with with the
the the doubt. Right? So I mean the way
that this generally works I think the
way that skepticism tends to have some
sort of compelling power over people is
you you know you start reflecting on
okay there's a whole bunch of different
scenarios where my experiences would be
just as they are. One of those scenarios
is the kind of common sense scenario
where you know I'm living in a world
populated by all these ordinary objects
and I have things like hands and I'm in
a room and you know there are cars and
trees and fields and all that stuff and
there's other people and etc etc. Um,
but there's also, you know, the brain in
the vat and the evil demon and the
simulation and blah blah blah, you know,
whatever it may be. There's a whole
bunch of other options and
it doesn't seem like I have any way of
ruling them. I I got nothing. I don't I
can't have any way of ruling them out. I
don't I'm just not sure. Um,
so I'm in a state of doubt. How do I get
out of that? doesn't look like
externalism is going to help me
at all. Doesn't help me if I'm if I if I
already doubt um and just to say that,
you know, I have a view of knowledge
that allows me. It's like, well, look,
um as as long as your visual perception
is in fact reliable, as long as there is
in fact an external world and the world
is as it seems to be, then you do know
that you have hands, it's like, yeah, so
what? um I don't need to rule out the
evil demon hypothesis in order to know
that there's an external world. It's
like, yeah, maybe I do have knowledge
then. Um so what? I'm still in a in a
state of doubt. Um so, you know, many
many skeptical arguments, as I say,
they're they're framed in terms of of
knowledge. Um and it's it's almost
presented as though the debate is about
the the the proper application
conditions of the term knowledge. Um,
but I I I think that that's kind of
again it's kind of missing the point.
Skeptical arguments don't need to be
framed that way. Indeed, I I think
really they don't need to be framed
necessarily as arguments at all. Um, at
least not in the sense that they are,
you know, sets of propositions that lead
to some other proposition. I mean, you
can instead just ask a question. You can
say, why should I trust this? Why trust?
So like you're giving me you you know
you're saying certain things about the
world. You're saying that there are
people and cars and fields and trees and
hands. Why should I trust that? Um
I'm I'm reflecting on all of the
different ways in which my experiences
might have come about. I'm reflecting
that what you're offering what you're
saying about the world is just one among
many ways that my experiences might come
about. So why the hell should I trust
that? Um, indeed as a just as a sort of
general metaphilosophical point, it's
not entirely obvious to me that
philosophy just in general has to be
about like propositional arguments
primarily. I mean, the point of an
argument is to in some way
fix or influence your beliefs. You know,
you you like the question that we start
with is what should I believe? What
should I think about what's going on?
you know, and arguments are an important
way to figure out what's going on, but
um they're only one way. You know,
arguments can induce doubt or they can
resolve doubt, but they're only one way
of of doing that. And you don't you
don't need like some propositional
argument to induce doubt um
or or necessarily to resolve it for that
matter. Um, I mean, let's say for
instance that I'm at like a, you know, I
don't know, a car dealership and I I get
the sense that somebody is scamming me,
right? I'm like, wait a minute, this
person isn't this person I'm not sure
that this person is legitimate. I have
this worry. I get I just sort of start
to get this worry that maybe there might
be some underhanded stuff going on. I
may not have arrived at that worry by
formulating an argument which ends with
the conclusion I am being scammed,
right? Um
but you know still I have this worry and
of course in that situation I don't
think it's going to be even remotely uh
uh comforting to be told well look it is
in fact true that you're not being
scammed and you're and the belief that
you're not being scammed is the product
of a you know reliable process that
tends to produce true beliefs over false
beliefs. So you know that you're not
being scammed. Yeah. You don't have to
don't worry about it. just go away and
ignore it. Um or maybe, you know, to
give a more sort of philosophically
relevant example, let's say that I
believe in God. You know, I've spent my
whole life uh going to church and
everything's organized around God.
Everybody in my community talks about
God. Um you know, maybe I sort of have
some view about uh how it is that we
form correct beliefs about God. Maybe I
think look God created us and because
he's the creator he installed in us a
certain capacity of uh you know
recognizing the divine in things etc etc
but then I encounter some people who
just don't believe in God and I notice
that you know oh their theory looks like
it's also entirely consistent with all
of these experiences I'm having and so I
start to wonder like wait you know is
God real um is it going to be any
comfort to be told that well you know
look you you have uh a true belief that
there's God and that true belief has in
fact been produced by a reliable process
you know that because God is is not a
deceiver right God has made you with
this capacity for recognizing him and
that tends to produce true beliefs over
false beliefs it's it's powerless I
think powerless to deal with the doubt
the doubt that is induced by
encountering these other world views and
the encounter with those other world
views again is not necessarily um it's
not necessarily a propositional argument
and it's not necessarily about the about
like whether you have knowledge. So I
think the basic challenge of skepticism
isn't it's not about whether you have
knowledge per some technical concept of
knowledge. The challenge is why should I
trust this? Right? So,
you know, I' I've realized that, okay,
there's these challenges to my beliefs
in some way. Um, and so now I wonder why
should I trust them? Uh,
why why do that? And no, it doesn't seem
to me just as a matter of like in
principle. It doesn't seem to me that
any argument about the concept of
knowledge or the concept of
justification or you know I just don't
see how that's going to do any how that
kind of argument is going to do anything
to resolve that doubt because you you
know it's like you can you can have an
absolutely watertight argument that you
know we have this concept of knowledge
and the application conditions for that
concept of knowledge means that that
concept does correctly apply to certain
people in certain circumstances. is
okay. So, so what I mean that's just
because the question from my point of
view is well how do I you know why
should I trust that I'm in those
circumstances? Um now of course it's
true that we we sometimes express uh
doubt or distrust um using the language
of knowledge uh using these sort of
knowledge terms. So, let's say you show
me a study that, I don't know, red meat
causes cancer, right? And I look at it
and I doubt its methodological
credentials. And I may well say, well,
you don't know that that's true. You
don't know that red meat causes cancer.
Um, but you know, there's other ways
that I could express the point. And I
don't think we should base our whole
epistemology on these sort of terms of
phrase. Actually, if you've been paying
attention to me as I've been talking
about this, you might notice that as
much I started out by saying, look, you
know, maybe we shouldn't think of
skepticism in terms of knowledge. But
I've had to be very careful and watch my
own language because I have occasionally
been tempted to say, well, how do I know
that, you know, I have hands? Um,
because it's just like a common way of
speaking. But the but it's it's like
okay don't get too fixated on just you
know the way that we happen to use the
English language here right when I say I
don't know that I have hands right what
I'm really expressing is something about
you know doubt distrust and again you
know giving saying well look you do know
that you have hands because you know I
have this I have a a watertight argument
for a concept of knowledge which entails
that you know knowledge applies just in
case there are hands and then your
visual perception is hooked hooked up to
them in the microwave. It's just just
irrelevant. It's it seems to me to be
completely beside the point. Um I want
to approach this from a slightly
different angle actually because I think
that it's not just arguments against
skepticism that can miss the point.
There are some arguments for skepticism
that I I think miss the point in a in a
very similar way. They kind of miss the
spirit of skepticism. So I'm thinking in
particular of some arguments for
skepticism that have been proposed by
Peter Anger. Um
so Peter Anger uh you know he kind of
targets this our concept of knowledge
and in particular he says that knowledge
is an absolute term. Uh so to understand
this take take the term flat right
according to flat means not bumpy.
and what that so when I say like the
table is flat I'm saying the table is
not bumpy I'm saying that the property
that the word bumpy purports to denote
is not present
but the thing is this
that property is present I mean it
clearly is if you look at a table if you
look at it close enough you're going to
find all kinds of you know bumps on it
in fact there are probably no
macroscopic physical objects for which
it is true that the property that bumpy
purports to denote is not present. Um
and so what this means is that the term
flat does not correctly apply to
anything in the physical world or at
least no to no you know none of the
macroscopic objects in in the physical
world. Uh none of the objects that we're
that we interact with in our everyday
lives are actually flat. Um
and so so the so the key thing here is
what what it means to say that flat is
an absolute term is that
flat will the term flat will not
correctly apply to anything if there's
even the slightest bump. Right? If if
that if bumpiness is present to even the
you know if there's even the tiniest
little bump on something then it's not
going to be true that that thing is
flat. Um because flat rules out
bumpiness
period. So any any tiny amount of bumps
that means that something is not flat
according to anger. But of course we you
know we can we we we talk about things
as if they're flat. And what's going on
here is well it's just an approximation
or maybe an idealization. It's you know
it's useful for us to talk about certain
things as if they are flat. It's useful
for us to act as if things are flat.
Even though, you know, if we were to
like actually look at them more
carefully, we would see that they are
not flat. In everyday situations, we
speak loosely and casually. We say many
things that strictly speaking are false,
but we act as if they are true. Um, and
so, you know, for anger, whenever we say
that any any macroscopic object is flat,
that's what we're doing, right? Um,
okay. So, what does this have to do with
knowledge? Well, knowledge according to
anger is also an absolute term.
And what what what he argues basically
is knowledge requires certainty. So to
say that I know that P, it's only going
to be appropriate for me to say that if
I can claim to be certain that P. But
certainty requires the complete
elimination of any doubt whatsoever.
Right? So to say that I am certain that
P means I have no doubt whatsoever about
P. is that there is just no possibility
that I might be wrong about P. And the
problem is is that there's always like
everybody recognizes that for any, you
know, for pretty much anything I say,
there's going to be the possibility that
I'm mistaken, right? I can never
completely eliminate doubt. Um maybe
there are some propositions for which
you think that you can completely
eliminate doubt. Maybe you think you
just have no doubt whatsoever about 1
plus 1 equals 2 or something. But like
when it comes to the claim that you have
hands, you know, I think the vast
majority of people would probably just
accept that yeah, you know, it's
possible there is going to be some
possibility uh that you might be wrong.
Uh even people who reject skepticism
will acknowledge that there's like a
possibility that I'm mistaken. It's like
sure, you know, uh maybe the brain in
the vat scenario or the evil demon
scenario like yeah, that's at least it's
possible. Um so it tends to be quite
rare for people to to actually think
that they have achieved total certainty
about something 100% certainty. So the
idea is this knowledge requires
certainty but to say that it is certain
that P this is this these are absolute
terms right there cannot be even the
slightest sliver of the possibility that
you are wrong this slightest doubt. So
what that means is we have no knowledge.
Um
so there you go. uh you get skepticism.
Um you do not know that you have hands.
And the reason why you do not know that
you have hands is that in order to know
that you have hands, you would have to
completely eliminate any possibility of
being mistaken. But you can't do that.
Now, this
is technically an argument for
skepticism. I mean, it's an argument for
the claim that we do not know that we
have hands. But there's something about
this that just seems to not really be
skepticism.
Like I look at this argument and I I
just sort of feel kind of completely
unmoved by it in terms of, you know, in
terms of like what the skeptic seems to
be getting at this argument. It's like,
well, maybe this is telling us something
interesting about the English language
term. No, maybe it's telling us
something interesting about the concept
of knowledge. But does this really have
anything to do with skepticism? I mean,
I think the problem is is that
even if even if this shows that I do not
know that I have hands, it doesn't
actually do anything to undermine my
trust that I have hands. It doesn't do
anything to induce doubt that I have
hands. Um,
and indeed, we could escape Anger's
skepticism by just reforming our
language. we could just decide to stop
using
knowledge uh the term knowledge in this
kind of absolute way, right? It looks
like if we reformed our language so that
we got rid of these absolute terms, then
we would no longer have any problem
saying, you know, well, actually, we do
know that we have hands. Um, and in
fact, I I imagine that that there
probably are uh already languages with
um with sort of epistemic uh uh terms,
sort of knowledge terms to which
arguments do not apply. I mean, I think
there's a pretty good argument actually
that um the English language is already
one of those. It really isn't at all
obvious to me that uh Anger's arguments
about the way the knowledge terms work
is even in the ballpark of being right.
Um but even if it is right, I think that
it misses the point of skepticism. And
it seems to me to miss the point of
skepticism in kind of the same way that
the externalist critique of skepticism
misses the point of skepticism. And you
know it's because look what is really
offering us is some sort of account of
like how the English language term
knowledge works or how the concept of
knowledge works. And it's not really
doing anything to induce doubt about
these things we ordinarily believe. Much
the same way the externalist just isn't
doing anything to remove the doubt that
reflection on skeptical scenarios
induces.
Um I mean there's there's other uh
beliefs uh views in philosophy um on
which
almost all of our ordinary knowledge
claims are false but which we do not
count as skeptical. We don't count them
necessarily as skeptical views. So um
take for instance eliminative
materialists like Paul Churchland for
instance. Um well if we think of
knowledge as being justified true belief
what Churchland says is well you don't
have any beliefs so I guess you don't
have any knowledge then um now I mean uh
you know obviously eliminative
materialists can offer alternative
accounts of knowledge um but it may well
be it may well turn out so these are two
things that could turn out to be true it
could turn out that yeah the term
knowledge the concept of knowledge is
actually connected to belief it's about
you know you have to have beliefs. It's
it's like connected in some deep way to
folk psychology. And it might well turn
out that eliminative materialism is
true, in which case you just don't have
any knowledge. And on this sort of view,
it's like, well, has that would that
would that establish skepticism? Like,
if we were to establish that the term
knowledge is part of folk psychology and
we were to establish that eliminative
materialism is true, would that
establish skepticism? I don't think it
would. And I don't think it would
because eliminative materialism
like on eliminative materialism, we
don't really doubt a whole bunch of
things about the world. I mean, for one
thing, we're going to take um the
sciences very seriously. You know, we're
going to take neuroscience seriously.
There's all sorts of claims about, you
know, brains and bodies and neurons and
uh and and all these things that we just
accept and we trust them. we like the
eliminative materialist at least of the
churchland kind trusts neuroscience
um so it's not skeptical
um or or take for instance murological
nihilists
logical nihilists argue that there are
no composite objects so there are no
hands so in fact you do not know that
you have hands and the reason why you
don't know that you have hands is
because there are no hands actually
false that you have hands and pretty
much all of your claims about you know
ordinary objects around you turn out to
be false. Um so you you know I mean it
looks like at least when it comes to
perception yeah I mean the the vast
majority of the claims you make on the
basis of perception turn out to be false
but again we don't consider myological
nihilism to be a skeptical position. And
I think the reason is because even
though it's like the murological nist is
saying you don't have hands.
They're not really doing anything to
undermine the sort of trust that I have
when I just look at open my eyes and
look at these things here. Like I still
tr I trust them. I I I'm not really I
don't have any deep doubt of what's
going on here. It just turns out that
okay,
these aren't composite objects, but
there's still particles arranged
handwise, and that's close enough. I
mean, what happens when you reflect on
skeptical scenarios is
you you you think you have this
realization of, wait a minute, it might
be that there's just not even anything
that's anywhere near close enough. Um,
it's kind of like, it might be more like
what happens when I just have a dream,
you know, when I'm dreaming at night and
I take myself to be, you know, part of
like a whole world where there's, you
know, people and things and, you know,
there's like certain
rooms and objects and, etc. And then I
and then I wake up and that just
disappears. Um, or at least it feels
like it almost completely disappears.
what's going on might just be totally
different to what I'm expecting. Um, but
that's not what the murological nihilist
offers. Uh, even though again
technically on myological nihilism it is
not true that you know that you have
hands. Um, so I think that when you know
we consider these sorts of cases
we can see you know I think some appeal
to thinking of skepticism not as a
claim. It's not really about
like knowledge and justification.
What it's about is is doubt or distrust.
Not taking certain things seriously. Um
when I'm when I'm reflecting on on the
skeptical scenarios, I'm put into a
state where I I doubt that I have hands.
I deeply doubt. It's not just like a
little bit of doubt. There's like a deep
doubt that I have hands. There's a
distrust in the claim that I have hands.
there's
just a sense of I really shouldn't be
taking too seriously this stuff going on
around me. And uh that I see is the is
the sort of challenge that's posed by
skepticism. Um okay. Well, I guess I've
spoken about this for like half an hour
now. So, uh yeah. Um that's probably a
good place to wrap it up. Anyway, um
hope that was of some sort of interest
and uh yeah, I'll see you next time.