Skip to main content
Back to top
Ctrl+K
Industrial Optimization
Quantum Research
Ocean SDK
Leap Service
Concepts
More
Licenses
Bibliography
Search
Ctrl+K
GitHub
Search
Ctrl+K
Industrial Optimization
Quantum Research
Ocean SDK
Leap Service
Concepts
Licenses
Bibliography
GitHub
D‑Wave Documentation#
Industrial Optimization
The Industrial Optimization section shows how to optimize business
problems using the Leap™ service’s quantum-classical hybrid
solvers.
Get Started with Optimization
Learn about optimizing with hybrid solvers.
Get Started with Optimization
Developing Quantum Applications
How D‑Wave and other companies develop successful
quantum applications.
Developing Quantum Applications
Solver Properties & Parameters
Properties and parameters of hybrid solvers in the Leap service.
Solver Properties & Parameters
Improving Hybrid Solutions
Scaling and usage best-practices.
Improving Hybrid Solutions
Performance Benchmarks
Performance studies on use cases.
Performance Benchmarks
The Quantum Research section shows how to use D‑Wave™
quantum processing units (QPU) directly.
Quantum Research
The Quantum Research section shows how to use D‑Wave™
quantum processing units (QPU) directly.
Get Started with Quantum Computing
Learn about D‑Wave quantum computers.
Get Started with Quantum Computing
QPU Hardware and Properties
QPU architecture, properties, errors, timing, etc.
QPU Hardware and Properties
Using the QPU
Configuring QPU parameters and usage best-practices.
Using the QPU
The Industrial Optimization section shows how to optimize business
problems using the Leap™ service’s quantum-classical hybrid
solvers.
ML/AI
D-Wave’s
PyTorch Plugin
provides an interface between D-Wave’s quantum-classical hybrid
solvers and the PyTorch
framework.
Also see the Machine Learning section.
Additional content for this topic is currently under development.
Welcome to D‑Wave#
First time here? Click to learn how to navigate the documentation
Pages have three navigation bars: top, left, and right.
Left navigation bar lets you select a subtopic; for example, how to
get started, properties, best practices.
Right navigation bar displays the topics on your current page.
Top navigation bar lets you select the following sections:
Industrial Optimization
Solving hard commercial optimization problems using
hybrid solvers.
Quantum Research
Using the quantum processing unit (QPU) directly on
Ising problems and QUBO models.
Ocean SDK
Reference documentation for the software development
kit (SDK) used with quantum computers.
Leap Service
Quantum cloud service’s account management, release
notes, IDE support, etc.
Concepts
Learn the relevant terminology and the fundamental
concepts. Search for terms here.
More > Licenses
Licensing information for the documentation and SDK.
More > Bibliography
Cited content.
It’s not a Turing machine, but a machine of a different kind.
— Richard Feynman, 1981
What D-Wave Does
Despite the incredible power of today’s supercomputers, many complex
computing problems cannot be addressed by conventional systems. The huge
growth of data and our need to better understand everything from the
universe to our own DNA leads us to seek new tools that can help provide
answers. Quantum computing is the next
frontier in computing, providing an entirely new approach to solving the
world’s most difficult problems.
While certainly not easy, much progress has been made in the field of
quantum computing since 1981, when Feynman gave his famous lecture at
the California Institute of Technology. Still a relatively young field,
quantum computing is complex and different approaches are being pursued
around the world. Today, there are two leading candidate architectures
for quantum computers: gate model (also known as circuit model) and
quantum annealing.
Gate-model quantum computing
implements compute algorithms with quantum gates, analogously to the use
of Boolean gates in classical computers.
With quantum annealers you initialize the
system in a low-energy state and gradually introduce the parameters of a
problem you wish to solve. The slow change makes it likely that the
system ends in a low-energy state of the problem, which corresponds to
an optimal solution. This technique is explained in more detail in the
What is Quantum Annealing? section.
Quantum annealing is implemented in D‑Wave’s generally available
quantum computers, such as the Advantage™ and Advantage2™ systems, as a single
quantum algorithm, and this scalable approach to quantum computing has
enabled us to create quantum processing units (QPUs) with
more than 5000 quantum bits (qubits)—far beyond the
state of the art for gate-model quantum computing.
D‑Wave has been developing various generations of our “machine of
a different kind,” to use Feynman’s words, since 1999. We are the
world’s first commercial quantum computer company.
Quantum Computers
A D‑Wave quantum computer contains a QPU that must be
kept at a temperature near absolute zero and isolated from the
surrounding environment in order to behave quantum mechanically. The
system achieves these requirements as follows:
Cryogenic temperatures, achieved using a closed-loop cryogenic
dilution refrigerator system. The QPU generally operates at
temperatures below 20 mK.
Shielding from electromagnetic interference, achieved using a radio
frequency (RF)-shielded enclosure and a magnetic shielding
subsystem.
Fig. 271 Advantage2 quantum computer.#
The D‑Wave QPU (Figure 272) is a lattice of tiny
metal loops, each of which is a qubit or a coupler. Below temperatures
of 9.2 kelvin, these loops become superconductors and exhibit
quantum-mechanical effects.
The QPU in D‑Wave’s Advantage2 system has more than 4,400 qubits
and 40,000 couplers. To reach this scale, it uses over 1,000,000
Josephson junctions.
For details on the topology of the QPU, see the
Topologies section.
Fig. 272 D‑Wave QPU.#
Note
D‑Wave’s quantum computer systems are available for
on-premises installation. For their physical specifications,
including electrical, cooling, environmental, and networking
requirements, download
System Specifications for D-Wave Quantum Computers.
For customers who directly access quantum computer hardware, see the
D-Wave Quantum Computer Operations manual, which includes essential safety
information.
Software Environment
Users interact with D‑Wave quantum computers through a web
user interface (UI), and through open-source tools that communicate with
the Solver API (SAPI).
The SAPI components are responsible for user interaction, user
authentication, and work scheduling. In turn, SAPI connects to back-end
servers that send problems to and return results from QPUs and
additional solvers, which are located in different geographical regions
(for example, North America or Europe).[1]
See Figure 273 for a simplified view of the
D‑Wave software environment.
[1]
Solvers are available by region.
To view the supported regions and solvers that are available in each
one, go to your dashboard in the
Leap service.
Fig. 273 D‑Wave software environment.#
Leap Service
The Leap service is the quantum cloud service from D‑Wave.
Learn about the types of problems that the D‑Wave quantum
computer can solve, run interactive demos and coding examples on the
system, contribute your coding ideas, and join the growing conversation
in our community of like-minded users.
For more information, see the Leap Service section.
Sign up for the Leap service here:
Leap service signup.
Ocean SDK
D‑Wave’s Python-based open-source software development kit (SDK),
Ocean SDK, makes application development for quantum computers rapid and
efficient and facilitates collaborative projects. See the
Ocean SDK section for the SDK and its reference
documentation.
On this page
Welcome to D‑Wave
Show Source
© Copyright D-Wave.
Ocean SDK version 9.4.0.