Thank you! Your submission has been received!
Oops! Something went wrong while submitting the form.
Account
Research Dashboard
Research Feeds
Library
Settings
Sign Out
Menu
Sign InCreate Free Account
Menu
Semantic Scholar API
Overview
Tutorial
Documentation
Gallery
Cite the Paper
Semantic Scholar API - Overview
Providing a reliable source of scholarly data for developers
Build projects that accelerate scientific progress with the Semantic Scholar Academic Graph API
Code Examples
Q&A Bank
Request an API Key
API Service Status Page
Read the Paper
Why use Semantic Scholar API?
The Semantic Scholar REST API allows you to find and explore scientific publication data about authors, papers, citations, venues, and more. The API is organized into the following services:
Academic Graph: Provides data about authors, papers, citations, venues, SPECTER2 embeddings, and more that allows you to link directly to the corresponding page on semanticscholar.org for more information.
Recommendations: Provides recommended papers similar to a given paper.
Datasets: Provides downloadable links of datasets in the academic graph.
To learn more about our API service, read The Semantic Scholar Open Data Platform paper.
Get Started
Semantic Scholar providing infrastructure for the research ecosystem is exciting as it enables partners like Litmaps to focus on creating great experiences for end users. We found the Semantic Scholar API and bulk data, clear and straightforward to use. The documentation, examples, and easy access to the raw data allowed us to move quickly on data integration, and get back to solving problems for our users.
Axton PittCo-founder and CTO, Litmaps
Eddie SmolyanskyCo-founder, Connected Papers
Since day 1 Connected Papers has been built on top of the Semantic Scholar Open Corpus and APIs, and heavily relies on them to provide paper discovery and search capabilities to our users. The APIs are well maintained, frequently updated, fast, and easy to use. The team is extremely responsive and has supported our growth every step of the way from open beta to a million users. This massive resource given to the public for free is a great driver for innovation in science and we are proud to be a part of the next layer of tools being built on top of it.
We are a startup that tracks the evolution and progress of AI research. Thanks to the Semantic Scholar API pulling in the latest references to papers from top AI conferences has been a really simple task. Otherwise, it would have taken much more time and effort.
Eduardo Antonio Espinosa GrimaldoFounder, Stateoftheart AI
Elman MansimovCo-Owner, Sourcely and Yomu
We at Sourcely have migrated to the Semantic Scholar API to provide academic references to students writing their essays, and our experience working with academic references APIs has never been better. Not only is the Semantic Scholar API very easy to use, quick, and reliable, but it also incorporates a lot of additional metadata like PDF URLs, abstract, summarization, and more, that are not easily accessible with other academic reference providers like Google Scholar. Students love the references provided by Semantic Scholar API and their experience on Sourcely has improved since migration. On top of that, the Semantic Scholar team has been very helpful in answering our questions and considering our feedback.
Access Our Continually Updating Corpus
214 Million
Papers
2.49 Billion
Citations
79 Million
Authors
Do I need an API Key?
Most Semantic Scholar endpoints are available to the public without authentication, but they are rate-limited to 1000 requests per second shared among all unauthenticated users. Requests may also be further throttled during periods of heavy use.
Certain endpoints require authentication via an API key, and authenticated users have access to higher rate limits. As a best practice, we recommend including your API key with every request. Using an API key will also help us better support you when you need additional help.
The introductory rate limit for an API key is 1 RPS on all endpoints.
You will receive your private API key via email. Do not share your key with anyone.
Request an API key
Additional Resources
We also provide the following datasets as free and open resources.
Semantic Scholar Academic Graph Dataset (S2AG)
Download records for research papers published in all fields as an easy-to-use JSON archive
SUPP.AI
An AI-curated corpus of supplements, drugs, and interactions
S2ORC
A general purpose corpus for NLP and text mining research over scientific papers
Stay Connected With Semantic Scholar
What Is Semantic Scholar?
Semantic Scholar is a free, AI-powered research tool for scientific literature, based at Ai2.
Learn More
About
About Us
Publishers
Blog
Ai2 Careers
Product
Product Overview
Semantic Reader
Scholar's Hub
Beta Program
API
API Overview
API Tutorials
API Documentation
API Gallery
Research
Publications
Research Careers
Resources
Help
FAQ
Librarians
Tutorials
Proudly built by Ai2 with the help of our Collaborators
Terms of Service • Privacy Policy • API License Agreement
Contact Us
Please visit our FAQ to find helpful information before submitting your question.
Your nameYour emailSubject
Topic
Select A TopicRemove A PaperMerge AuthorsOtherFeedback
Thanks! Your feedback has been submitted.
Something went wrong while submitting the form, please try again.