RCSB PDB
Deposit
Deposit via OneDep
Prepare Files via pdb_extract
Validate Structures
PDBx/mmCIF Dictionary Resources
Other Deposition Resources
Search
Advanced Search
Sequence Similarity Search
3D Similarity Search
Chemical Similarity Search
Browse by Annotations
New Entries
Unreleased Entries
PDB Statistics
Visualize
Mol* (MolStar)
Sequence Annotations Viewer
Genome View
Analyze
Pairwise Structure Alignment
Symmetry Resources in the PDB
Structure Quality
Grouping Structures
PDB Citation MeSH Network Explorer
PDB Statistics
EPPIC Biological Assemblies
External Data and Resources
Integrated Resources
Additional Resources
Download
Coordinates and Experimental Data
Sequences
Ligands
File Download Services
Web APIs
Learn
Training Courses
Guide to PDB Data
Molecule of the Month
Educational Resources
Curricula
Browse
News
SciArt Galleries
Irving Geis
David Goodsell
About
Contact Us
About RCSB PDB
Vision and Mission
Citation, Usage, Privacy Policies, Logo
News
PDB History
PDB50
User Community
Publications
RCSB PDB Advisory Committee
Team Members
Service Status
Careers
COVID-19
Help
Contact us
256,292
Structures from the PDB archive
1,062,058
Computed Structure Models (CSM)
Help Articles
General Help
Organization of 3D Structures in the Protein Data Bank
Identifiers in PDB
Computed Structure Models and RCSB.org
Integrative Structures on RCSB.org
Assessing the Quality of 3D Structures
Data From External Resources Integrated Into RCSB PDB
Ligand Structure Quality in PDB Structures
Symmetry Resources in the PDB
Electron Density Maps and Coefficient Files
Structures Without Legacy PDB Format Files
Deposition Resources
Software Supporters
Membrane Protein Resources
Website FAQ
Glossary
LigandExpo Shutdown
Search and Browse
Overview: Search and Browse
Basic Search
Advanced Search
Overview: Advanced Search
Attribute Search
Attribute Details
Sequence Similarity Search
Sequence Motif Search
3D Similarity Search
3D Motif Search
Chemical Similarity Search
Search Examples
MyPDB
Browse Options
Overview: Browse
ATC
Biological Process
CARD
CATH
Cellular Component
Disease Ontology
ECOD
Enzyme Classification
Genome Location
MeSH
Membrane Protein (OPM)
Molecular Function
Membrane Protein (mpstruc)
Protein Symmetry
SCOP-e
SCOP2
Source Organism
Exploring a 3D Structure
Overview
Structure Summary Page
Structure (3D Visualization)
Annotations
Experiment
Sequence
Genome
Ligands
Versions
Grouping Structures
Overview: Grouping Structures
Sequence-based Clustering
Grouping Search Results
Group Summary Pages
Explore Sequence Alignments in 3D
3D Viewers
Mol*
Getting Started
Maneuvering in Mol*
Making Selections
Navigating by Sequence
Managing the Display
Common Actions
FAQs/Scenarios
Mol* Cheat Sheet
Support for immersive AR/VR
Jmol
NGL to Mol* UI Migration Guide
Sequence Viewers
Sequence Annotations Viewer
Sequence Annotations in 3D
Genome View
Protein Sequence Alignment View
Tools
Pairwise Structure Alignment
Programmatic Access
File Download Services
Web APIs Overview
Open-Source Tools
Batch Downloads with Shell Script
Migrating from Legacy APIs
Access to Legacy Theoretical Models
Additional Resources
3D Printing
Databases and Knowledgebases
Crystallography Software
Electron Microscopy Software
Modeling and Simulation Software
File Readers
NMR Software
Molecular Graphics Software
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19
Sequence Analysis
Structure Classification and Analysis
Data Management Standards and Best Practices
Structure Prediction
Structure Validation and Quality
Programmatic Access
Web APIs Overview
The Application Programming Interface or APIs provide programmatic access to the PDB archive. APIs that power the rcsb.org website are:
Data API serves to retrieve data when you know the PDB identifier
Search API serves to find out what identifiers match a certain search condition
ModelServer API is a service for accessing subsets of macromolecular model data
VolumeServer API is a service for accessing subsets of volumetric data
Sequence Coordinates API serves alignments between structural and sequence databases and integrates protein positional features from multiple resources
Alignment API provides a streamlined method for programmatically executing structure alignment calculations
Stay up-to-date with API developments by viewing (or subscribing) to the RCSB PDB API announcements Google group.
For details on our Python API client and how to integrate it into your workflow, learn more about rcsb-api.
Data API
All static data that is exposed in rcsb.org is available in the Data API. The schema follows the mmCIF dictionary, extended with annotations coming from external resources. The core PDB data is split up into core objects, one per level of the structural data hierarchy, with entity subdivided into polymeric and non-polymeric subschemas (differing from the mmCIF dictionary). These are some of the core objects:
core_entry: data that relates to a PDB entry or Computed Structure Model (CSM). Identified by an entry_id, which can be an alphanumeric PDB-ID or a CSM-ID that starts with AF_ or MA_
core_polymer_entity: data for each polymeric molecular entity in an entry (e.g., protein, DNA, and RNA). Identified by entry ID and entity ID separated by a _ character, e.g. 3PQR_1
core_nonpolymer_entity: data for each non-polymeric small chemical entity in an entry (e.g., enzyme cofactors, ligands, ions, etc). Identified by entry ID and entity ID separated by a _ character
core_branched_entity: data for branched molecules (e.g., oligosaccharides). Identified by entry ID and entity ID separated by a _ character
core_assembly: data for each biological assembly in an entry. Identified by entry ID and assembly ID separated by a _ character
core_polymer_entity_instance: an instance of a certain polymeric molecular entity, also known as chain. Identified by entry ID and asym ID separated by a _ character
core_chem_comp: a chemical component. Identified by a unique alphanumeric code chem_comp_id
Both internal additions to the mmCIF dictionary and external resources annotations are prefixed with rcsb_. In each core object, the rcsb_<core_object>_container_identifiers field holds the cardinal identifiers for the objects and any parent/child. Additionally every core object contains a single string identifier in field rcsb_id.
The data is available via 2 different interfaces:
REST API Full Reference
The REST API permits the retrieval of all data for one core object at a time.
GraphQL API (GraphiQL interface)
The GraphQL interface offers more flexible data retrieval, essentially making it possible to grab any piece of data from any level of the hierarchy in a single query. To use it programmatically POST your GraphQL queries under the data.rcsb.org/graphql endpoint.
All output from both REST and GraphQL interfaces is offered in JSON format.
Data API Tutorial
Search API
The search API programmatically exposes all search functionality available at rcsb.org. It is possible to perform queries with arbitrary Boolean logic across all data available in the RCSB PDB data API via a convenient JSON-format query language. At the root level it is also possible to combine text-based searches (any text/numerical field in the RCSB PDB data API) with protein/nucleotide sequence search (mmseqs2 software) and Structure similarity searches (BioZernike software, described in Guzenko et al 2020). All output from the Search API is offered in JSON format.
Search API Tutorial
Search API Full Reference
This Search API example shows how to find all PDB structures and CSMs for a given UniProtKB sequence
ModelServer API
The ModelServer is a service for accessing subsets of macromolecular model data. It delivers atomic coordinates together with annotations in the primary data files in a compressed BinaryCIF encoding (BCIF). Structure data can be served at different levels of granularity (e.g., assembly, polymer chain, ligand), and ligand data may also be delivered in popular chemical informatics formats (e.g., SDF, MOL, MOL2).
ModelServer API Specification
The specification of the BinaryCIF format can be found at: https://github.com/molstar/BinaryCIF.
VolumeServer API
The VolumeServer is a service for accessing subsets of volumetric data. It automatically downsamples the data depending on the volume of the requested region to reduce the bandwidth requirements and provide near-instant access to even the largest data sets.
VolumeServer API Specification
Both ModelServer and VolumeServer are part of Mol* (D. Sehnal, A.S. Rose, J. Kovca, S.K. Burley, S. Velankar (2018) Mol*: Towards a common library and tools for web molecular graphics MolVA/EuroVis Proceedings.doi:10.2312/molva.20181103).
Sequence Coordinates API
The Sequence Coordinates API provides alignments between structural and sequence databases and integrates protein positional features from multiple resources. Alignment data is available for NCBI RefSeq (including protein and genomic sequences), UniProt and PDB sequences. Protein positional features are integrated from UniProt, CATH, SCOPe and RCSB PDB.
Sequence Coordinates API Tutorial
Alignment API
The Alignment API serves as a comprehensive platform for the seamless computation of structure alignments. Structure alignment focuses on making an optimal superposition of the 3D coordinates of biological macromolecules to establish a residue-residue correspondence between sequences of related structures. This API provides a streamlined method for programmatically executing structure alignment calculations.
Alignment API Tutorial
API Rate Limits
The RCSB PDB APIs implement rate-limiting measures to ensure fair usage. While access to static files is not restricted, all RCSB PDB APIs have rate limits in place. We recommend starting with a handful of requests per second. If you exceed the limit, the service will respond with a 429 HTTP error code, indicating that you need to reduce your request rate as described below.
If you encounter this error, you can retry your query after a short waiting period or add a waiting period after each request. The exponential backoff strategy, which gradually increases the time between retries, is a common way to find an acceptable request rate. Additionally, if you are using a public IP address that is shared with other users, such as certain universities or when using a VPN, you might encounter rate-limiting issues earlier due to shared resources.
License
RCSB PDB Web Services are available under the same terms and condition as the RCSB PDB usage policies
Contact RCSB PDB with questions or suggestions for specific services.
Please report any encountered broken links to info@rcsb.org
Last updated: 4/10/2026
About
About Us
Citing Us
Publications
Team
Careers
Usage & Privacy
Support
Contact Us
Help
Website FAQ
Glossary
Service Status
RCSB PDB is hosted by
RCSB PDB is a member of
RCSB Partners
Nucleic Acid Knowledgebase
wwPDB Partners
RCSB PDB
PDBe
PDBj
BMRB
EMDB
RCSB PDB Core Operations are funded by
the U.S. National Science Foundation (DBI-2321666),
the US Department of Energy (DE-SC0019749),
and the National Cancer Institute,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
and National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under grant R01GM157729.
RCSB PDB uses resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a Department of Energy User Facility.