Menu
Home
Home
Join
Members
Documentation
Forum
Blog
Contact
Get involved
Overview
Become a member
Events
Service providers
Research Organisation Registry (ROR)
Special programs
Working for you
Data citation
Sponsors program
Ambassadors
Working groups
Code of conduct
Fees
API Learning Hub
Find a service
Overview
Content Registration
Grant Linking System (GLS)
Metadata Retrieval
Open Funder Registry (OFR)
Support for Reference Linking
Similarity Check
Cited-by
Metadata Plus
Crossmark
Documentation
Overview
Setting up as a member
The Research Nexus
Metadata principles and practices
Register and maintain your records
Schema library
Reports
Crossmark
Cited-by
Similarity Check
Metadata Retrieval
About us
Overview
Operations & sustainability
Board & governance
Publications
Strategic agenda and roadmap
Our truths
Our people
Organisation chart
Jobs
Latest blog posts
2026 June 30
Building, refining, and connecting: summary of our May 2026 Community Update
Our 2026 Community Update took place on 13 May. Two calls, one for the eastern and one for the western time zone, highlighted how our global community is growing, how we’re refining the metadata that supports trust in the scholarly record, and connecting records more effectively through our latest tools.
...Find out more
2026 June 26
From commitment to connection: 200,000 grants in the scholarly record
Funding is one of the key enablers of the research lifecycle, but has been one of the hardest parts of the scholarly record to identify, describe and connect. This is slowly changing as we have recently reached a very exciting milestone for Crossref’s Grant Linking System (GLS). What makes it remarkable is not only the numbers reached, but where the data comes from. Research funders, who joined Crossref as members, have actively contributed more than 200,000 grants to the Research Nexus (Figure 1).
...Find out more
2026 June 23
New Crossref Service Providers Program ready for applications
We are pleased to announce the re-launch of the Crossref Service Providers Program. From today, we are accepting applications from organisations providing tools for metadata registration to Crossref members. Participation in this program is free and the application involves an accreditation process to determine eligibility and the appropriate participation tier.
As a membership organisation, Crossref supports its members to provide rich and complete metadata which facilitates integrity judgements, increases discoverability, linking among scholarly objects and activities, and improves transparency. Service providers are key collaborators in this work because they enable our members to adopt better metadata practices.
...Find out more
2026 June 18
Building Better Connections: The Story of Crossref's Metadata Development
Three years ago, we asked our members what they needed from Crossref’s metadata. We received confirmation that we were going in the right direction, as well as some new ideas to explore. This helped set the course for our metadata development work since then, and continues to guide where we’re headed next.
...Find out more
Menu
search
Documentation
Home>
Documentation>
Metadata Retrieval>
REST API>
Tips and tricks
Documentation Menu
Documentation
Setting up as a member
Your Crossref account credentials
Constructing your DOIs
DOIs for different levels
Suffixes containing special characters
Suggested DOI registration workflow, including suffix generator
DOIs and DSpace repositories
Creating a landing page
Working with a service provider
Hosting platforms
Manuscript submission systems
Planning a platform migration
Checklist for platform migration
Leveling up as a member
The Research Nexus
Introduction to books and chapters
Introduction to conference proceedings
Introduction to datasets
Introduction to dissertations
Introduction to grants
Introduction to journals and articles
Introduction to peer reviews
Introduction to pending publications
Introduction to posted content (includes preprints)
Introduction to reports and working papers
Introduction to standards
Metadata principles and practices
Metadata best practices
Abstracts
Bibliographic metadata
Funding metadata
License metadata
Multi-language material and translations
References
Relationship metadata
Version control, corrections, and retractions
Books and chapters
Conference proceedings and papers
Datasets
Dissertations
Grants
Journals and articles
Peer review
Posted content
Reports and working papers
Standards
Register and maintain your records
Choosing a content registration method
OJS platform
OJS 3.4
OJS 3.3
Web deposit form
Metadata Manager
Direct deposit of XML
Upload XML files using our admin tool
XML deposit using HTTPS POST
POSTing files using our upload tool
Testing your XML
Using JATS XML
Verify your registration
Submission queue and log
Interpret submission logs
Troubleshooting submissions
Notification callback service
Creating and managing DOIs
Changing or deleting DOIs
Transferring responsibility for titles and DOIs
Transferring prefixes between different Registration Agencies
Multiple resolution
Maintaining your metadata
Updating your metadata
Adding references to your metadata record
Resource-only deposit
Registering updates
Metadata removal markup guide
Updating metadata for inherited DOIs after a title transfer
Schema library
Required, recommended, and optional metadata
Markup guides for metadata segments
Abstracts
Archive locations
Article numbers or IDs
Contributors
Data and software citation deposit guide
Face markup
Resource and full-text URLs
Funding information
ISSNs and ISBNs
License information
MathML
Translated and multi-language materials
References
Relationships
Titles
Markup guides for record types
Books and chapters markup guide
Components
Conference proceedings markup guide
Datasets markup guide
Dissertations markup guide
Grants markup guide
Journals and articles markup guide
Peer reviews markup guide
Pending publications markup guide
Posted content (includes preprints) markup guide
Reports and working papers markup guide
Standards markup guide
XSD schema quick reference
Schema versions
Metadata deposit schema 5.4.0
Metadata deposit schema 5.3.1
Grants schema
Resource-only deposit schema 5.4.0
Metadata deposit schema
Reports
Browsable title list
Conflict report
Depositor report
DOI crawler report
DOI error report
Field or missing metadata report
Missed conflict report
Participation Reports
Resolution report
Schematron report
Reference Linking
How do I find and create reference links?
Crossmark
Participating in Crossmark
Update policy page
Crossmark button guidelines
Linked clinical trials
Crossmark and transferring responsibility for DOIs
Crossmark terms
Cited-by
How to participate in Cited-by
Retrieve citations using Cited-by
Open Funder Registry
Accessing the Open Funder Registry
Funding data overview
Updating funding deposits with new registry info
Funder data via the API
Similarity Check
How to participate in Similarity Check
Checking your eligibility and applying
Adding full-text URLs to new deposits
Adding full-text URLs to existing deposits
Setting up your iThenticate v1 account (admins only)
Administrator checklist
Admin settings
Account information
Manage users
Setting up your iThenticate 2.0 account for use directly in the browser (admins only)
Administrator checklist
Exclusions
Private repository
Manage users and folders
Setting up your iThenticate 2.0 account MTS integration (admins only)
Administrator checklist
Setting up your MTS integration with an API key
Exclusions
Private repository
Manage users and folders
Using your iThenticate account
Folders
Documents overview
Submit a document
Creating and finding your Similarity Report
Working with your Similarity Report
Doc-to-doc comparison
Your Similarity Check user account
Settings
Understanding your Similarity Report
Upgrading from iThenticate v1 to iThenticate 2.0
iThenticate v1 or iThenticate 2.0?
Upgrade FAQs
Get help with Similarity Check
Similarity Check (Româna)
Listă de verificare pentru administrator
Similarity Check (Español)
Lista de comprobación para administradores
Metadata Retrieval
REST API
Access and authentication
REST API filters Tips and tricks
XML API
Query schema
Query examples
Public data files and snapshots
Data citations
OAI-PMH
OpenURL
DOIs, OpenURL, and link resolvers
Retraction Watch
Simple Text Query
Content negotiation
Matched references
Accessing full texts
API Versions XML output formats
UNIXSD query output format
UNIXREF query output format
XSD XML query output format
Metadata Plus
Metadata Plus keys
Metadata Plus snapshots
Back to top
Questions?
Visit forum
or contact us
Tips and tricks
We love to share our data and we want it to be used. Yes, really—and by as many people as possible. Here we share tips to help you get the most out of our REST API. Everyone benefits if you use our REST API responsibly and efficiently. Very occasionally we have had to block users who misuse our APIs, usually through carelessness rather than malice. If you follow the advice on this page you should have no problem.
Note that for conciseness, the examples on this page omit the API URL, which is https://api.crossref.org/v1, so for an example like /members/120 the full query is https://api.crossref.org/v1/members/120.
On this page
Where do I start?
Get the right endpoint
Use filter and query parameters
Be selective with fields, if you need to be
How much metadata? Rows and cursors
Large numbers of queries and very large results sets
How to keep your local data synced with the REST API
Code Libraries
Where do I start?
If you are just getting started with our API, we recommend heading to the API Learning Hub. There you can get to grips with APIs, what kind of metadata you can retrieve, and how to formulate queries. For a description of the endpoints and request parameters, see our Swagger documentation, where you can try out some queries.
Get the right endpoint
Most of our queries go through the /works endpoint. If you’re looking for research outputs such as journal articles, that’s probably where you want to start.
Bear in mind that we also have other endpoints, including /prefixes, /journals, and /members. You can, for example, get all works in a journal by using its ISSN, e.g.: /journals/0003-3804/works. The members endpoint contains summary metadata about organisations that have deposited metadata, including which metadata fields they deposit and the fraction of records with certain properties e.g.: /members/120.
Use filter and query parameters
Our API contains a range of parameters that can be used to pull out records that match certain criteria. For example, various kinds of date filters: /works?filter=from-pub-date:2024-01-01,until-pub-date:2025-12-31 will get all records with a publication date in 2024.
There are filters to detect the presence of certain properties, e.g., /works?filter=has-references:1,filter=has-orcid:1 will return only works with both references and authors where at least one has an ORCID ID.
There are also filters for specific values, e.g., /works?filter=type:journal-article,funder:10.13039/100000040 retrieves journal articles funded by the organisation with the specified funder ID.
If you are looking to analyse a large number of metadata records, such as all records from a single journal or publisher, it is almost always more efficient to query using a filter than for each DOI individually.
Be selective with fields, if you need to be
If you are only interested in 2 or 3 fields of the output from the works endpoint, you can use select to retrieve only that metadata. For example, /works?rows=10&select=DOI returns the DOI field. Don’t do this if you’re looking for more than 3 or 4 fields: the longer your list of fields gets, the more it slows down the query. Instead, retrieve the whole record and discard the information you don’t need. This can make your API calls much more efficient. For example:
Retrieve 10 random DOIs in the Crossref corpus with only the DOI and record title: https://api.crossref.org/works?sample=10&select=DOI,title
Retrieve all works for ISSN 1527-2095 with only these elements returned in the results: DOI, title, and page number (only the first 20 results are returned): https://api.crossref.org/journals/1527-2095/works?select=DOI,title,page
How much metadata? Rows and cursors
You can make more efficient use of the API and get results more quickly by thinking in advance about how many results you need. The default number of rows returned is 20 and you can increase it up to 1000. If you have a query where you only need to know the total number of results, you can use rows=0. For requests with a query parameter, 2–5 rows might be enough (see more on that below), whereas to look at a few examples of records with a certain property, maybe 10 records is enough.
Each endpoint has a limit on the number of items returned in a single request. Paginating through multiple pages of results is possible through the cursor parameter.
To retrieve multiple pages, add cursor=* to your first request (and a value for rows that is greater than 0). The response will include a next-cursor value. Use this in your next request to obtain the following page of results. Stop sending requests when the number of items in the response is less than the number of rows requested.
Cursors expire after 5 minutes if not used. Note that our REST API returns a cursor even on the last page. To stop your script at the correct point, check the number of results returned—you have reached the last page when it is less than the requested rows.
Example: https://api.crossref.org/funders/501100009187/works?cursor=*&rows=600&select=DOI,title,container-title,is-referenced-by-count (Note: in this example, at the time of this writing, there are ~1025 results for this query, so you are requesting 600 rows; the first page of results will include 600 results, while the second will include ~425, thus you know that you have retrieved all results once you see the second page, since 425 < 600).
Large numbers of queries and very large results sets
If you are planning to get hundreds of thousands or even millions of records from our API, read this section before you get started!
First, determine whether you really need to use the REST API. We have an annual public data file that contains all of our data. If you are a Metadata Plus subscriber, you have access to a monthly snapshot. Using these and setting up a local database means that you can run more custom queries than with the API and get results more quickly.
Second, cache your results. Try to avoid making the same requests repeatedly. Our metadata does change over time, but the majority of records change infrequently, if at all.
Third, if you do need to make a query with a very large result set, we recommend splitting it into a series of smaller queries. You can use cursors to page through results, but if you’re running to thousands of pages, the chance of a cursor failing and expiring at some point becomes much higher. For example, if you break down a request into days or weeks and one of them fails, it will be much easier to go back and pick up the missing data. Also pay attention to the http status code and back off if you start seeing 4XX statuses.
How to keep your local data synced with the REST API
You might have a request that you want to make repeatedly and keep local results cached. You may even want to have a complete copy of the Crossref database and keep it up-to-date (in this case consider whether Metadata Plus might be a good option for you, since the monthly snapshots provided as part of the service would best enable this. Here are a few suggestions and tips for how to do that.
Choose your date filter. There are three types of date filters that can help you pick up new and updated items.
The created date will return any new records (from-created-date, until-created-date).
Using updated date will give you both new records and those with any changes deposited by the member (from-update-date, until-update-date).
The indexed date retrieves all records updated or created by the stearding member, as well as those that were modified by Crossref or other third parties, for example to update the Cited-by count or add a relationship deposited by a different member (from-index-date, until-index-date).
As you can see, the third of these options gives you the most results, but it can return a very large number of records. Which option you choose will depend on how you want to use the metadata. For this use case, we don’t recommend using published date, as this can change over time and might be different from when the record was created, meaning that you are likely to miss results.
Here are some other considerations.
Choose your frequency. How often do you want to get new records? All of these filters offer the option to retrieve updates once per second, but you might decide that once an hour, once a day, or once a month is ok. Note that the timestamps are inclusive, so to get everything created between 12:00 and 13:00 on 1 January 2025, you can use: filter=from-created-date:2025-02-02T12,until-created-date:2025-01-12. Using 13 instead of 12 in the until-created-date filter will get you two hours of data, not one.
Use cursors. If your time range is reasonably large or you aren’t using other additional filters, it is likely that you will reach more than the page limit of 1000 items. Use cursors in your request to make sure you get all of the results (see above).
Cache. To make sure you don’t keep retrieving the same unchanged records, make sure you save the responses locally. If you are looking for updates or newly indexed works, you will need to replace the old records in your cache with the newest version.
Code Libraries
There are a number of libraries that have been written for the Crossref REST API. These are neither maintained nor endorsed by Crossref (except where noted). Available libraries include:
crossrefapi (Go)
pitaya (Julia)
crossref-commons (Python, developed by Crossref)
habanero (Python)
crossrefapi (Python)
rcrossref (R)
serrano (Ruby)
crossref-rs (rust)
Crossref API Typescript client (Typescript)
Page maintainer: Martyn Rittman
Last updated: 2025-October-24
Join the community
Get email updates
Membership
Governance
Sustainability
Services
Documentation
Status page
API Learning Hub
Community forum
Join
Contact
Jobs
Blog
The content of this site is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
Accessibility
Privacy