Skip to Main Content
Caltech
Library
Guides
CaltechAUTHORS
About CaltechAUTHORS
Search this Guide
Search
CaltechAUTHORS: About CaltechAUTHORS
Repository of research papers authored by faculty and other researchers at Caltech. This guide answers many of the basic questions users may have.
About CaltechAUTHORS
CaltechAUTHORS general search guide
Full metadata field searches
CaltechAUTHORS Repository Policies
Linking to Publications
Open Access Policy FAQ
Related Guides
What is CaltechAUTHORS?
CaltechAUTHORS is part of the Digital Archives of the California Institute of Technology and is managed by the Caltech Library. Its mission is to collect, manage, preserve, and provide global access over time to the scholarly output of the Institute and the publications of campus units. It has been active since 2001.
CaltechAUTHORS contains research publications by Caltech faculty and other Caltech researchers. Most items in CaltechAUTHORS are articles, but there are also books, book chapters, conference papers and more. The repository is updated continuously as departments and library staff add available and recently published documents.
This site is powered by InvenioRDM, an open source research data management (RDM) repository platform.
Any correspondence concerning this specific repository should be sent to library@caltech.edu.
CaltechAUTHORS supports OAI 2.0 with a base URL of https://authors.library.caltech.edu/oai2d.
Policy on Self-Archiving in CaltechAUTHORS
The Faculty Board has charged the library with documenting the scholarly output of the Institute. It has not placed any restrictions on Caltech authors in their choice of publication venues or publishing agreements. CaltechAUTHORS documents the scholarly output of the Institute in accordance with the policies of the publishers and in cooperation with our authors.
Many publishers forbid authors from making their published content available on institutional repositories such as CaltechAUTHORS, or at least require an embargo period. They will, however, often allow unrestricted access to author’s accepted versions. We therefore highly encourage you to upload copies of these if you have them.
We are happy to host the accepted version of the manuscript and to provide access to the referrer link, if the publisher provides one, to enable free access to the final, published version. Library staff will download the published version and preserve it, regardless of redistribution rights provided by the publisher. If publishers forbid making public access available locally, the published version will be stored in a dark portion of the archive.
Policy on Adding Restrospective Holdings
Library staff can add retrospective records to CaltechAUTHORS in order to complete faculty bibliographies. We request that you provide us with a bibliography including DOIs (if possible) for Library staff to use to generate a bulk ingest file. We will review all submissions to ensure quality and accuracy of added records and compliance with Caltech’s and publishers’ policies on Open Access.
Next: CaltechAUTHORS general search guide >>
Last Updated: Jun 24, 2026 4:14 PM
URL: https://library.caltech.edu/caltechauthors
Print Page
Login to LibApps
Report a problem.
Subjects:
Digital Repository Guides
Tags:
caltech collection
CaltechAUTHORS
coda
copyright
repositories
repository
research publications