2026-07-02T04:51:48Z
https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/cgi/oai2
ePrints Soton
http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/cgi/oai2
2.0
eprints@soton.ac.uk
2021-12-11T15:30:50Z
persistent
YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ssZ
oai
eprints.soton.ac.uk
:
oai:eprints.soton.ac.uk:35997
1. This is an institutional repository.
2. e-Prints Soton will accept any material that relates to research output in any format including multimedia. Examples of material include journal articles, book chapters, conference papers, PhD theses and unpublished research. The University of Southampton has a federated approach to repository management and some items like primary research data may be held by another University of Southampton repository as appropriate.
3. Research papers may include: (a) unpublished pre-prints (not peer-reviewed) (b) final peer-reviewed drafts (post-prints) (c) published versions.
4. Research papers are individually tagged with their peer-review and publication status.
5. Principal Language: English
1. Anyone may access the metadata free of charge.
2. The metadata may be re-used in any medium without prior permission for not-for-profit purposes and re-sold commercially provided the OAI Identifier or a link to the original metadata record are given.
1. Items are available free of charge.
2. Copies of full items generally can be: (a) reproduced, displayed or performed, and given to third parties in any format or medium (b) for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge, provided: (a) the authors, title and full bibliographic details are given (b) a hyperlink and/or URL are given for the original metadata page (c) the content is not changed in any way.
3. Full items may be harvested by robots transiently. Where full items are harvested permanently permission must be sought from the University of Southampton.
4. Full items must not be sold commercially in any format or medium without formal permission of the copyright holders.
1. The aim of the University of Southampton Research Repository (e-Prints Soton) is to provide a permanent record of the research output of the University and maximise the visibility, usage and impact of this research through global access.
2. Where possible the respository will include an author deposited copy of the research paper/work or a deposit made by an authorised second party.
3. Deposit of full items is encouraged at the earliest possible opportunity with the option of an embargo facility to delay public visibility to meet funders’ and publishers’ requirements.
4. All deposits will be assessed to ensure that they are within the scope of the repository by the e-Prints Soton editorial team and every effort will be made to validate published works although responsibility for the authenticity of deposits lies with the author.
This system is running eprints server software (EPrints 3.3.15) developed at the University of Southampton. For more information see http://www.eprints.org/