The whole theme of my talk is
mathematics is entering the 21st
century. So this is actually very
appropo. Um
all right. Yeah. So as I said we have
worked uh in much the same way for for
centuries. Uh on the left is a picture
of a a textbook uh from 200 years ago.
Um and it's it's a bit hard to to see
this resolution and it's written in
French too but um if you're a
mathematician you'll recognize the
formats of the equations. Things have
really not changed that much in 200
years. is I mean we had latte and a
couple other minor things but um and uh
yeah the blackboards are so ubiquitous
in fact they're even an art form um
Jessica Win who I is a friend of mine
actually she she actually photographs um
well she's a professional photo
photographer she she photographed um a
whole bunch of mathematical um
blackboards as works of art and made it
into a nice coffee table book
um yeah and here's the life cycle as I
said of um mathematical problems there's
a whole life cycle where where proofs of
slowly get generated ated uh understood,
digested and eventually end up in
textbooks and also in uh now the
training gate of AI and whatever. Um but
um yeah so so what AI has been doing is
sort of accelerating proof generation
creating solutions and to some extent
proof verification but not so much uh
the rest of the digestion process. Um
and so this has started creating um what
I call proof indigestion or traffic jams
in mathematics. Um and I think the same
thing is happening in the other sciences
too now. Um we are um yeah so journals
for example we're suddenly um we're
receiving floods of AI generated papers
which actually many of them are actually
very low quality but some actually have
have some value but but we don't have
the the human resources to referee all
of these um um all these new advances
and so we could all these new
bottlenecks are emerging. Um there are
um there are sites devoted to solving
problems uh where suddenly solutions are
piling up and people um are not um uh
are not able to um to verify them. Um
and so what this tells me is that
traditional a um frameworks for doing
research uh in mathematics you know
journals and and and conferences and
whatever uh they can't handle
unrestricted AI use. Um um and in fact
um and in fact adding more and more AI
to uh to these these these sort of
infrastructures is can actually be quite
harmful um that can crowd out um human
contributions. Um so um
uh as an analogy I like to think of AI
as sort of like the invention of the
automobile. Um and in the 19th century
when the uh in the end of the 19th
century early 21st 20th century when
automobiles came out the the only
infrastructure available were the
streets that were built in the 19th
century and these very narrow
cobblestone streets. Um and so they had
to drive in these streets and it there
was no no rules for traffic or or there
was um and it was all mingled together
humans and and and and automobiles and
it was pretty chaotic. um and um and uh
you know making the you know the cars
the technology got better, they got
faster and safer and more energy
efficient and whatever but still that
doesn't solve this this congestion
problem. Um so that's kind of where
mathematics and probably the sciences
more more broadly stand today with
regards to AI. So what we need is to
redesign our infrastructure and create
um new ways to do scientific research
that can accommodate um uh AI use
safely. So with the automobile, we
figure this out. We have um you know
some we have roads that are specifically
forum automobiles or for trains or or or
motors or whatever. Um and then we have
pedestrian walkways for which no cars
are allowed and then there's a very
small number of hybrid um um uh roads
where you have both. Um and we figured
out ways to to have them coexist. Um now
it's not perfect. Um some uh some cities
may may may u may have may overweight
their infrastructure towards cars. This
is so um it's still it's still a um a
work in progress but um uh but it is
much better than the 19th century model
of having everything pass through the
same um infrastructures. So uh we should
keep our infrastructures of journals and
and all the traditional uh ways of
producing research uh still valuable but
we should also create new ones. So
that's what I've been interested in at
SEI. Um and so one of the the venues for
this are the um SE competitions which
I'm going to talk about. Um uh so um um
so with AI there's a lot of new
possibilities that that uh so in
particular in mathematics um mathematics
has been kind of a fairly highly
gatekeeper until recently. You know you
needed a math PhD often to even
understand the problems that we work on
let alone contribute to them. Um but now
we have the capability to to really um
accept um for certain for certain types
of math problems you can you can you can
um uh you can take in contributions from
the broader um community of math
adjacent people who may not have PhDs in
mathematics some do some don't um but
they they have these new tools AIs and
whatever and they can contribute uh but
the key is that um we need uh to design
the right problems for them to work on
for which we can safely incorporate
hundreds or thousands of contributions
from the public. Um, in the past this
has not worked because we couldn't
verify all the the contributions that
come in and many are very low quality.
Uh, but we've started to figure out some
ways to um to do this. Uh, and the
competitions we're talking about are an
example there. So, right now we have
three competitions um ongoing. Uh, none
have completely finished yet. Um, but
they have all produced nice intermediate
results. Um, the first competition is
what we called a distillation challenge.
We launched it on Pi Day uh March 14th.
Um so it built upon a previous um
crowdsourced project that I ran about
two years ago uh called the equation of
theories project. Um so this was a an
experiment to see whether we could
really do mathematics at scale with
modern technologies. Um so we created um
22 million problems in algebra. Now this
is not a math talk. So um uh okay the
questions I think is like does the
commutive law imply the associative law?
if you know what these things are. Um
and in this um but uh the exact um um
problems are not important. Let's just
say we generated this um big sort of um
um uh test set of 22 million questions
each of which were um most of which are
not too hard like you get a graduate
student in algebra working it for an
hour they can solve any given one of
these questions but we have 22 million
of these questions. Two years ago we
completed this project. Uh many many
people contributed with many tools um
AIS and and other and more traditional
uh computational tools and we managed to
settle this um uh all 22 million
questions. So so uh we have 22 million
true false questions yes or no. And so
we have this nice little data set of of
of math in algebra. Um but uh it's a
very complicated data set. Um and um any
individual question with with modern AI,
you could feed any given one of these 22
million data points to a frontier model
and it will think for 30 minutes and
spend a few dollars of of compute and it
will answer most almost like 99% of
these questions yes or no correctly. Uh
which is fine but um um it um but this
doesn't sort of tell you what what what
the structure is. What what uh uh what
are the features of this data set? uh is
there a way to sort of uh describe all
these answers in a condensed way? Um so
we set up what we call a distillation
challenge. So if you instead of using a
premium fancy expensive model, if you
use a a very cheap open- source model
that just runs for for pennies, um then
it's terrible on these problems
currently. You you you give it one of
these problems and it has a 51% chance
of getting the answer right like barely
better than than than random chance. Um
but um uh so but um it turns out that if
you give um these open source models a
good prompt um like a one-paged set of
tips on how to solve algebra problems
and it turns out that they can do a lot
better just like a very weak student um
at taking an algebra midterm may do very
badly unless they are given a one-page
sheet of lots of helpful things to do
and they can do a lot better. Um, so the
distillation challenge that that we set
up uh was the competition was to submit
a one-page cheat sheet to help these
very weak uh AI models um um um do well
at sort of this this midterm of of
solving these 22 million true false
questions. So uh contestants would
submit a cheat sheet. we would test them
against a test set of of select
carefully selected um sample problems
and they get a grade and and and um they
have to try to to find cheat sheets that
uh um that that um that performed as as
well as possible and these are cheat
sheets that AIs can read but humans can
read too. Um so the idea is whether you
can sort of distill this entire
knowledge of 22 million true force
questions down to like a single page um
that uh um uh that kind of explains the
essence or can explain as much of of of
this data set as possible. Um so uh that
that challenge has um uh is still
ongoing. Um we have um the the results
so far are quite quite promising. So, so
with the best cheat sheets currently, um
the past the success rate of these weak
AIS uh has increased by 20 30 percentage
points from 50% to like 80% accuracy. Um
and uh the the next stage is is um is to
uh which is still ongoing is to get
these these a um these um weak models to
not just produce yes no true force
answers but actually write proofs and
actually give more detailed
explanations. Um and I'll be very
interested to see how how that goes.
It's a much more challenging um task. Um
okay, you can't really read it, but this
this is what one one of these cheat
sheets actually looks like. It's it's
it's very tur because it has this it has
to fit on one page, but it is actually
um uh you can see that it it's encoding
a lot of information about the problems
we're solving.
Okay. Um we're running uh short on time,
so I think I'll skip one of the
competitions. I I'll talk about the
final competition that we are um um
running right now. And it's actually
quite exciting. We're checking it every
day. The the the latest results. Um so
um this is um a more mainstream
mathematical challenge. We we have we we
this challenge was created in in
cooperation with the um uh LMFDB the L
function say modular forms database uh
which is um um a major database of
mathematical objects of interest in
number theory, cryptograph cryptography,
many other fields of mathematics. Um and
um they were interested in something
called the inverse gow problem. Uh which
um uh okay the exact technical details
of this are again maybe not in the scope
of this uh this conference but um you
can think of it like an Easter egg hunt.
Um so um we're looking for polinomials.
So think think of them like eggs. Okay.
So we have these these polinomials and
each egg has a certain um property like
a certain color if you wish. Okay. So um
it's called a gawa group. Um and we're
interested in collecting um um eggs of
various colors. Okay. So, so there are
some colors that are very common and and
some are very rare. Um if you collected
baseball cards or other trading cards,
you you may have um you know you know
some cards are common, some cards are
rare and and there are people who try to
collect the entire set of of all the
cards of a certain type. And so this is
roughly speaking what we are trying to
do. We we are um we are try we are um it
turns out that in this particular
problem there are 160,000 colors if you
wish or or types of polomials and we
want to collect one of each. Um so so
this this collection game or Easter egg
hunt if you wish. Um all right. Yeah. So
um
so um so the thing about this challenge
is that once you f you can type in a
polinomial. A polinomial is is just is a
these are polinoms of 22 24. You just
have to type in 24 integers. And it's
very easy with modern um um computer
software to take this this polinomial
and just work out its color. Okay. like
okay this this this this polinomial has
a G group which is 24T t146 okay that's
that's one of the uh colors that that
that you can get um and so it's very
easy once you write write down um a
polinomial to see u what what what which
egg you you have gotten um but we want
to collect all of them um and so that
the for the common ones that's very easy
but there's some ultraware ones in fact
there may be some for which for which uh
there are no for which no Easter eggs
exist uh we don't know in fact the whole
the whole inverse gawa problem is is to
um uh is is is is whether every single
possible color is actually attainable.
That's that's an that's a major open
question in in GAWA theory. Um so uh we
decided to make this a competition. Um
and so um yeah so we we've we've been um
yeah so um contestants can submit
polinomials and and we verify them. Uh
we don't reveal so we have two stages of
this competition. We have a competitive
stage which is ongoing right now and
then there'll be a cooperative stage
afterwards that is hasn't started yet.
Uh in the competitive stage um we don't
reveal the polinomials. Each team has
their own secret stash of polinomials
they submit them and um if they're the
first to get if they're the only ones
who have a a certain color then they
they get one point. If if if um if many
um teams have submitted um have found
the same color, then the points are
shared in a somewhat complicated
formula. Um so um uh we want to
encourage um people finding very
difficult hard to find uh uh Easter
eggs. And part of the reason why we do
this this experiment is because we don't
know in advance which ones are hard,
which ones are easy. Um and so we're
hoping this competition will actually
uncover kind of by market forces if you
wish uh which of these um uh GA groups
are actually very rare in which are
common. Um we we have very little
empirical data about this. We um
mathematics traditionally has not been
an experimental science. Um but now we
can do kind of experimental studies um
of u of mathematical objects and and
this is really exciting a new capability
um that these these these these tools
are offering. Yeah. So there are many
teams uh so this is a graph of of of
team progress in the last week or two.
Um there are some teams that have
clearly using a lot of AI and it's sort
of scooting ahead for now. Um but you
know um the lead is not guaranteed. You
know if if somebody else can also
replicate and find the similar um um uh
other eggs of the same colors as the
leading teams they can steal these guys
points and so we expect the the lead to
to fluctuate. Yeah. And actually it um I
don't have these this graph is from
three days ago but it's it's been
changed. It's not quite as monotonic as
um there's been some some recent uh
upsets. Um so this has been quite
exciting. Um um the uh the organizers
have been reporting that at math
conferences in algebra people all know
about this competition. Um that some
people are organizing their own private
teams and they're all very excited. um
which is in contrast so so many of the
other AI contributions mathematics they
have a mixed reception in in mathematics
some people uh welcome them and some
people are afraid that that they're
going to take away ma you know they will
um they'll compete directly with what
mathematicians do but this is an
orthogonal capability to what
traditional mathematicians do and um
it's a I think it's it's a very good
place to to to to direct these these AI
u uh these new uh AI capabilities okay
just like we have roads for humans and
roads for AI. We will have competitions
with heavy AI assistants, but we also
have traditional um uh math workflows.
Uh so this is still ongoing. Um I hope
to report more about it in a future
meeting how how these things these
things go, but so far it's been very
popular and uh um yeah, the leaderboards
and yeah, I mean there's a little
community um sharing tips and and so
forth. Um okay, so I think I'll skip the
um slides. Um we are trying to scale
these up. So we are running three
competitions on uh a fairly minimal
budget right now. U you know we have
just a few uh engineers and uh and some
comput resources. Eventually we wanted
to scale up um to do much larger
competitions which with much more
compute and and uh with some
high-profile prizes and things. Um all
the competitions right now are in
mathematics u partly because that's the
easiest where you can you can verify the
submissions. You can score very quick
easily. But in principle, there could be
other scientific competitions that you
could find. If there's some big data set
that someone wants to wants to collect
um and there's some way to do it in a
crowdsourced fashion um you know yeah
come talk to us. We might be able to set
up a competition. Uh we do hope to set
up a formal call for for proposals um in
the near future. Uh but that's still you
know having board meetings and lots of
internal emails about how how best to do
this. Um okay so I think um I will in
interest of time I will stop here. So
thank you very much.