Menu
Home
Home
Join
Members
Documentation
Forum
Blog
Contact
Get involved
Overview
Become a member
Events
Service providers
Research Organisation Registry (ROR)
Special programs
Working for you
Data citation
Sponsors program
Ambassadors
Working groups
Code of conduct
Fees
API Learning Hub
Find a service
Overview
Content Registration
Grant Linking System (GLS)
Metadata Retrieval
Open Funder Registry (OFR)
Support for Reference Linking
Similarity Check
Cited-by
Metadata Plus
Crossmark
Documentation
Overview
Setting up as a member
The Research Nexus
Metadata principles and practices
Register and maintain your records
Schema library
Reports
Crossmark
Cited-by
Similarity Check
Metadata Retrieval
About us
Overview
Operations & sustainability
Board & governance
Publications
Strategic agenda and roadmap
Our truths
Our people
Organisation chart
Jobs
Latest blog posts
2026 June 30
Building, refining, and connecting: summary of our May 2026 Community Update
Our 2026 Community Update took place on 13 May. Two calls, one for the eastern and one for the western time zone, highlighted how our global community is growing, how we’re refining the metadata that supports trust in the scholarly record, and connecting records more effectively through our latest tools.
...Find out more
2026 June 26
From commitment to connection: 200,000 grants in the scholarly record
Funding is one of the key enablers of the research lifecycle, but has been one of the hardest parts of the scholarly record to identify, describe and connect. This is slowly changing as we have recently reached a very exciting milestone for Crossref’s Grant Linking System (GLS). What makes it remarkable is not only the numbers reached, but where the data comes from. Research funders, who joined Crossref as members, have actively contributed more than 200,000 grants to the Research Nexus (Figure 1).
...Find out more
2026 June 23
New Crossref Service Providers Program ready for applications
We are pleased to announce the re-launch of the Crossref Service Providers Program. From today, we are accepting applications from organisations providing tools for metadata registration to Crossref members. Participation in this program is free and the application involves an accreditation process to determine eligibility and the appropriate participation tier.
As a membership organisation, Crossref supports its members to provide rich and complete metadata which facilitates integrity judgements, increases discoverability, linking among scholarly objects and activities, and improves transparency. Service providers are key collaborators in this work because they enable our members to adopt better metadata practices.
...Find out more
2026 June 18
Building Better Connections: The Story of Crossref's Metadata Development
Three years ago, we asked our members what they needed from Crossref’s metadata. We received confirmation that we were going in the right direction, as well as some new ideas to explore. This helped set the course for our metadata development work since then, and continues to guide where we’re headed next.
...Find out more
Menu
search
Documentation
Home>
Documentation>
Metadata Retrieval>
REST API
Documentation Menu
Documentation
Setting up as a member
Your Crossref account credentials
Constructing your DOIs
DOIs for different levels
Suffixes containing special characters
Suggested DOI registration workflow, including suffix generator
DOIs and DSpace repositories
Creating a landing page
Working with a service provider
Hosting platforms
Manuscript submission systems
Planning a platform migration
Checklist for platform migration
Leveling up as a member
The Research Nexus
Introduction to books and chapters
Introduction to conference proceedings
Introduction to datasets
Introduction to dissertations
Introduction to grants
Introduction to journals and articles
Introduction to peer reviews
Introduction to pending publications
Introduction to posted content (includes preprints)
Introduction to reports and working papers
Introduction to standards
Metadata principles and practices
Metadata best practices
Abstracts
Bibliographic metadata
Funding metadata
License metadata
Multi-language material and translations
References
Relationship metadata
Version control, corrections, and retractions
Books and chapters
Conference proceedings and papers
Datasets
Dissertations
Grants
Journals and articles
Peer review
Posted content
Reports and working papers
Standards
Register and maintain your records
Choosing a content registration method
OJS platform
OJS 3.4
OJS 3.3
Web deposit form
Metadata Manager
Direct deposit of XML
Upload XML files using our admin tool
XML deposit using HTTPS POST
POSTing files using our upload tool
Testing your XML
Using JATS XML
Verify your registration
Submission queue and log
Interpret submission logs
Troubleshooting submissions
Notification callback service
Creating and managing DOIs
Changing or deleting DOIs
Transferring responsibility for titles and DOIs
Transferring prefixes between different Registration Agencies
Multiple resolution
Maintaining your metadata
Updating your metadata
Adding references to your metadata record
Resource-only deposit
Registering updates
Metadata removal markup guide
Updating metadata for inherited DOIs after a title transfer
Schema library
Required, recommended, and optional metadata
Markup guides for metadata segments
Abstracts
Archive locations
Article numbers or IDs
Contributors
Data and software citation deposit guide
Face markup
Resource and full-text URLs
Funding information
ISSNs and ISBNs
License information
MathML
Translated and multi-language materials
References
Relationships
Titles
Markup guides for record types
Books and chapters markup guide
Components
Conference proceedings markup guide
Datasets markup guide
Dissertations markup guide
Grants markup guide
Journals and articles markup guide
Peer reviews markup guide
Pending publications markup guide
Posted content (includes preprints) markup guide
Reports and working papers markup guide
Standards markup guide
XSD schema quick reference
Schema versions
Metadata deposit schema 5.4.0
Metadata deposit schema 5.3.1
Grants schema
Resource-only deposit schema 5.4.0
Metadata deposit schema
Reports
Browsable title list
Conflict report
Depositor report
DOI crawler report
DOI error report
Field or missing metadata report
Missed conflict report
Participation Reports
Resolution report
Schematron report
Reference Linking
How do I find and create reference links?
Crossmark
Participating in Crossmark
Update policy page
Crossmark button guidelines
Linked clinical trials
Crossmark and transferring responsibility for DOIs
Crossmark terms
Cited-by
How to participate in Cited-by
Retrieve citations using Cited-by
Open Funder Registry
Accessing the Open Funder Registry
Funding data overview
Updating funding deposits with new registry info
Funder data via the API
Similarity Check
How to participate in Similarity Check
Checking your eligibility and applying
Adding full-text URLs to new deposits
Adding full-text URLs to existing deposits
Setting up your iThenticate v1 account (admins only)
Administrator checklist
Admin settings
Account information
Manage users
Setting up your iThenticate 2.0 account for use directly in the browser (admins only)
Administrator checklist
Exclusions
Private repository
Manage users and folders
Setting up your iThenticate 2.0 account MTS integration (admins only)
Administrator checklist
Setting up your MTS integration with an API key
Exclusions
Private repository
Manage users and folders
Using your iThenticate account
Folders
Documents overview
Submit a document
Creating and finding your Similarity Report
Working with your Similarity Report
Doc-to-doc comparison
Your Similarity Check user account
Settings
Understanding your Similarity Report
Upgrading from iThenticate v1 to iThenticate 2.0
iThenticate v1 or iThenticate 2.0?
Upgrade FAQs
Get help with Similarity Check
Similarity Check (Româna)
Listă de verificare pentru administrator
Similarity Check (Español)
Lista de comprobación para administradores
Metadata Retrieval
REST API
Access and authentication
REST API filters Tips and tricks
XML API
Query schema
Query examples
Public data files and snapshots
Data citations
OAI-PMH
OpenURL
DOIs, OpenURL, and link resolvers
Retraction Watch
Simple Text Query
Content negotiation
Matched references
Accessing full texts
API Versions XML output formats
UNIXSD query output format
UNIXREF query output format
XSD XML query output format
Metadata Plus
Metadata Plus keys
Metadata Plus snapshots
Back to top
Questions?
Visit forum
or contact us
REST API
Our publicly available REST API exposes the scholarly metadata that members and trusted sources deposit with Crossref. This bibliographic metadata and much more—you will find funding data, license information, post-publication updates, ORCID and ROR IDs, and abstracts. You can search, facet, filter, or sample metadata from dozens of thousands of members from all around the world, and the results are returned in JSON format.
The metadata is deposited directly by our members, who publish the content represented by each metadata record. This is complemented by trusted sources, such as Retraction Watch. You will also find other identifiers, such as ORCID for individuals, RORs for funders and affiliations, and more. In some cases we add these identifiers where they are missing in the original deposit. There is an overview of the available content at Crossref stats.
No sign-up is required to use the REST API, and almost none of the metadata is subject to copyright, and you may use it for any purpose. Some abstracts contained in the metadata may be subject to copyright by publishers or authors.
Quick start
Use https://api.crossref.org/ as your base URL. Add one of the available endpoints to query works, journals, members, funders, licences, prefixes, or types. Here are some examples to get you started:
I would like to…
Example request
Use the polite pool
https://api.crossref.org/works?rows=0&mailto=yourmail@company.org
Retrieve metadata for a Crossref DOI
https://api.crossref.org/works/doi/10.1128/mbio.01735-25
Retrieve records for 10 content items
https://api.crossref.org/works?rows=10
Find works in the journal Psychoneuroendocrinology, ISSN 03064530
https://api.crossref.org/journals/03064530/works
Endpoints
The Crossref REST API provides a number of endpoints for querying different types of records. Each endpoint has request parameters and filters to enable you to retrieve the metadata you are looking for. For further details about each endpoint, its parameters, and to try them out, see the Swagger documentation at https://api.crossref.org/
Endpoint
Metadata returned
/works
A list of content items registered with Crossref. This endpoint has a large number of parameters and filters available.
/works/{doi}
A single metadata record for a Crossref DOI.
/works/{doi}/agency
The registration agency for the specified DOI (e.g., Crossref or DataCite).
/journals
A list of journals whose content with registered content items.
/journals/{issn}
Details of the journal with the given ISSN.
/journals/{issn}/works
A list of works in the journal with the given ISSN.
members
A list of all organisations that have registered metadata with Crossref.
/members/{id}
Details about the Crossref member with the specified member ID.
/members/{id}/works/
A list of works associated with the specified member.
/prefixes/{prefix}
The name and Crossref member ID of the steward of the specified prefix.
/prefixes/{prefix}/works
A list of works associated with the specified prefix.
/funders
A list of funders in the Open Funder Registry.
/funders/{id}
Metadata for the member with the given ID.
/funders/{id}/works
A list of works associated with the specified funder ID.
/types
A list of all work types used in Crossref metadata.
/types/{id}
Information about the specified work type, e.g. journal-article, monograph, grant.
/types/{id}/works
A list of works with the specified work type.
/licenses
A list of licenses used by registered content items.
Content negotiation
The REST API can return single metadata records in a variety of formats through a process known as content negotiation. See the content negotiation page for more details.
Report an issue
Have you detected something that you would like to report? It could be incorrect, confusing, or partial metadata. Please report it on our community forum or check our backlog of bugs and feature requests to see if it has already been reported.
Page maintainer: Martyn Rittman
Last updated: 2020-April-08
Join the community
Get email updates
Membership
Governance
Sustainability
Services
Documentation
Status page
API Learning Hub
Community forum
Join
Contact
Jobs
Blog
The content of this site is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
Accessibility
Privacy