Mapping
A Hidden InfrastructureUnderground AtlasDownload the Data
Mycorrhizal Fungi
IntroductionClimateThreats
Scientists
Core ScientistsAssociates
Expeditions
Ghana
Atacama
Corsica
Kazakhstan
Palmyra
Lesotho
Utrecht
Apennine Mountains
Patagonia
About SPUN Expeditions
Learn about our SPUN-led sampling expeditions to map mycorrhizal biodiversity.
Sampling Protocol
How to sample soil for molecular analysis.
DEI Statement
Our commitment to inclusive action in expeditions.
Research
ExplainersPeer Reviewed Papers
Underground ExplorersPress
About
Who We AreHow We Are FundedUpdatesInclusive ActionContact UsCareers
Get
involvedGet involvedDonate
en
English
Spanish
French
A Hidden Infrastructure
Beneath every ecosystem on Earth is an underground circulatory system: complex, dense networks of underground fungi that move massive amounts of carbon and nutrients, regulating the climate and feeding plants above ground. But what is the global scale of all this hidden infrastructure, and how is it distributed? Until recently, no one really knew.
watch the launch video
Explore the map
Victoria Terry - VU Amsterdam, AMOLF
jun 11, 2026
A new interactive map, created by SPUN, along with new research published in Science, provides the first real estimate of the enormity and distribution of Earth’s arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal networks. The research was produced by an international team led by SPUN researcher Justin Stewart and Corentin Bisot of the AMOLF Physics Institute. The data, available for downloading, can help scientists and decision-makers begin to determine which of these vital fungal systems are thriving, which may need help, and which clearly need more sampling.
It also offers compelling surprises.
‍
Share this article
scientific publication
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.adu4373
download the data
The Length
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi shuttle water, phosphorous and nitrogen to 70 percent of land plant species. In exchange, these fungi receive carbon from plants, drawing down the equivalent of roughly 4 billion tons of carbon dioxide, or 11 percent of the CO2 emissions from fossil fuels. Through this relationship, mycorrhizal fungi helped shape life on land for 450 million years. So how big must this global underground circulatory system be?
Bigger than you think—perhaps by a lot.
Each fungal network is made up of strands of tubular cells, called hyphae, which are 10 to 50 times thinner than a human hair. Nutrients and carbon travel through these hyphae. They may increase the foraging area of plant roots 100-fold.
And if every arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal hypha in the world from the top 15 centimeters of soil were laid end-to-end? The new work estimates they would stretch from Earth to the sun—about a billion times. That’s roughly 110 quadrillion kilometers of hyphae.
‍
The mass
Biomass is a common way to measure the size of living things. For fungi that means estimating the mass of all hyphae in a section of soil, but using a method that can be extrapolated to reflect the variation in fungal species across the Earth. That requires finding an average hyphal density and radius for soils.
Density is the length of fungal hyphae in a teaspoon of soil. To determine it, researchers compiled data from 16,000 soil samples gathered by hundreds of scientists from more than 4,000 locations across many ecosystem types - forest, tundra, desert, farmland and more. To find a useful radius, an imaging robot developed at AMOLF, the Dutch biophysics institute, captured more than 300,000 measurements of hyphae from five strains of three common fungi. Scientists then combined that information with soil chemistry, climate and vegetation data and used machine learning models to make predictions.
The total biomass of all that underground infrastructure: about 300 million tons. That’s roughly 5 times the weight of every human alive.
‍
The map
But where are the densest networks of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi? The extraordinary extent of underground fungi was then mapped across the Earth, predicting likely hyphal densities for every square kilometer of land on all vegetated continents. That includes regions scientists have not yet even sampled.
The under-sampled areas have higher levels of uncertainty associated with the predictions (see uncertainty analyses in the Science publication). But there is no mistaking the patterns that emerge.
For instance, moist, tropical broadleaf forests are among the world’s most productive aboveground systems. Yet patterns are different below ground: the highest density of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, on average, were found in wild grasslands, more than a third denser than tropical broadleaf forests. In fact, fully 40 percent of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are found in grasslands such as those on the Tibetan Plateau, in Kansas’ Flint Hills Prairie, Florida’s Everglades or South Sudan’s Sudd Wetlands.
There is also evidence that we are changing this underground landscape: the data suggest that large-scale agricultural crop lands are predicted to be associated with about 50 percent lower network densities. The research doesn’t link particular farming practices to mycorrhizal health, but researchers worry lower fungal densities reduce soil resilience and lower its ability to cycle nutrients and store carbon.
The next step is getting these data into the hands of decision-makers to help move conservation and climate agendas toward including fungal networks.
‍
Explore the map
Sign up for SPUN updates
Email Address
Thank you! Your submission has been received!
Something went wrong. Try again later or contact us.
Mapping
Underground AtlasA Hidden Infrastructuredownload the data
Mycorrhizal Fungi
IntroductionClimateThreats
Scientists
Core ScientistsAssociates
Expeditions
SPUN ExpeditionsSampling ProtocolDEI Statement
Research
ExplainersPeer Reviewed Papers
Underground Explorers
press
About
Who We AreHow we are fundedupdatesInclusive ActionContact UsCareers
Glossary
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. View our Privacy Policy for more information.
Accept all cookiesrejectPreferences
Privacy Preferences
When you visit websites, they may store or retrieve data in your browser. This storage is often necessary for the basic functionality of the website. The storage may be used for marketing, analytics, and personalization of the site, such as storing your preferences. Privacy is important to us, so you have the option of disabling this storage that is not necessary for the basic functioning of the website.
Reject all cookiesAllow all cookies
Essential
Always Active
These items are required to enable basic website functionality.
Analytics
Essential
These items help the website operator understand how its website performs, how visitors interact with the site, and whether there may be technical issues. This storage type usually doesn’t collect information that identifies a visitor.
Confirm my preferences and close