Hello YouTube. Well, it's been a while,
hasn't it? I'm hoping that over the next
few months I can maybe get into uh
uploading videos again. Um so, yeah,
hoping to upload stuff more regularly
soon. Let me know if there are any
topics you're interested in me covering
and I'll see what I can do. Anyway, in
this video I'm going to look at the
veridicalist response to skepticism. Um
so, we will start with the the classic a
classic skeptical argument. I've made
plenty of videos on skepticism before.
So, I mean, I'm just going to be fairly
brief here, but uh you know, you take
some proposition about the external
world, say the proposition that I have
hands, and the skeptic is then going to
propose a skeptical hypothesis which is
consistent with all of my experiences.
But, uh if that hypothesis is true, then
it's false that I have hands. So, for
example, the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis.
Uh I am a brain in a vat and all of my
sensory experiences are caused by inputs
uh manipulated by some supercomputer.
Uh
the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis is
consistent with all my experiences. If I
were a brain in a vat, things would
appear to me exactly as they currently
do.
Um I mean, assuming the computer's set
up the right way.
Uh I wouldn't be able to distinguish any
difference.
Um but of course, on that hypothesis,
the vast majority of my beliefs about
the external world are going to be
mistaken. So, basically, the argument
runs as follows, right? Premise one, if
I don't know that I'm not a brain in a
vat, I don't know that I have hands. Uh
premise two, I don't know I'm not a
brain in a vat,
so I don't know I have hands.
In order to know that I have hands, I
would need to rule out
uh the alternative hypothesis that I am
a handless brain in a vat. But, there is
nothing I can do to rule out that
hypothesis.
Uh any
any perceptual experience could be
induced by a sophisticated enough vat
that controls the sensory inputs. So, I
don't know that I have hands. And of
course this argument is going to
generalize to various propositions about
the external world and to and of course
to various other skeptical hypotheses.
Um you know, if I don't know that not S,
I don't know that P. I don't know that
not S, so I don't know that P. Cuz
there's a variety of skeptical
hypotheses. There's you know, the
dreaming hypothesis. Maybe maybe all of
this is just a dream. There's the evil
demon hypothesis. Maybe there's a super
powerful evil demon, something like the
devil is directly manipulating my mind
in order to create all of my
experiences. There's the simulation
hypothesis, which is that um we're all
part of a very sophisticated computer
simulation. I mean, it's not just that
you know, I'm a brain in a vat with the
computer influencing the brain, it's
that
like all of me is uh is is is just part
of some computer simulation. These are
some of the famous examples and of
course there are many more.
Um so, any of these skeptical hypotheses
is going to threaten
uh uh all of our empirical knowledge
about the world. Um
all right, well that's a pretty standard
sort of argument. Now, as I said, in
this video we're going to look at a
response to skepticism known as
veridicalism.
So so veridicalism
uh
veridicalism accepts the second premise
of the skeptical argument. The
veridicalist accepts that
I I can't rule out any of these
skeptical hypotheses. So, I don't know
that I'm not a brain in a vat. I don't
know that I'm not being deceived by an
evil demon, etc.
But the veridicalist denies the first
premise. So, according to veridicalism
even if I am a brain in a vat, I still
know that I have hands.
And the reason for this, according to
veridicalism, is that subjects in these
skeptical scenarios hold mostly true
beliefs. So, even if I'm a brain in a
vat, it's still true that I have hands.
A brain in a vat can have a justified
true belief that they have hands.
So, even though for all I know, I am a
brain in a vat, I still know that I have
hands.
Um
the most famous
current proponent of veridicalism is uh
David Chalmers. Um so, we'll um
I'll I'll I'll look at I'll focus on his
work here. There are many different ways
of being a veridicalist. Um the the key
thing about the the sort of key
distinguishing feature of veridicalism
is simply this claim that uh
that a subject in a skeptical scenario
actually holds mostly true beliefs. So,
in in a way, skeptical scenario is a bit
of a misnomer. These scenarios aren't
really skeptical scenarios at all. Um
because actually, if you you know, if
you are a brain in a vat, the vast the
vast majority of your beliefs about the
world still come out as being true. So,
it's not really you know, you're not
you're not in a skeptical situation
there.
So, the an initial motivation for
veridicalism comes from our reaction to
surprising scientific discoveries.
So, we've always believed that hands are
solid objects. And I mean, you might say
that solidity is is an essential
property of hands, you know, in the
sense that something couldn't be a hand
if it were not solid, you know, anything
that's liquid or gas couldn't really be
a hand. You might say that. Yeah,
solidity is an essential property of
hands. And traditionally, we have
thought that solidity involves uh matter
occupying
all of the space. Like, for an object to
be solid means that uh
it it's matter fully occupies the space
within it. It it it it can maintain its
shape. It has a shape that it can
maintain without external interference.
And And then it And then its matter kind
of fully occupies the space within that
shape.
But then we made this surprising
discovery that all of the solid objects
with which we're familiar are mostly
empty space. Um
as it turns out, you know, like like the
particles that compose all these solid
objects is actually mostly empty space.
Um and this is of course only one among
many surprising discoveries about
ordinary objects such as hands.
It turns out the hands are very unlike
what we initially took them to be.
So, did we thereby discover that hands
do not exist? That we were wrong to
believe that we have hands? Well, of
course not. Hands exist all right, just
not in the way that we thought they did.
Um I mean, these days solidity is
defined just more in these sort of
functional terms, you know, solidity is
just a matter of, I don't know, being
able to maintain a shape without
interference, resistance to external
forces, whatever. The idea of
you know, solidity as involving this
like total spatial occupation, that has
been dropped.
So, um
we can say, you know, look, we
we discovered something surprising about
the underlying metaphysics of hands.
But, the ordinary belief there are hands
doesn't presuppose anything about the
underlying metaphysics of hands. Hands
might be composed of matter spread
through a spatial continuum, or they
might be composed of tiny particles
jostling in empty space, or they might
be composed of some, you know, balance
of the four humors, uh black bile,
yellow bile, phlegm, and blood, or they
might be composed of the ideas in the
mind of God, or they might be composed
of billions of tiny fairies or
something. I mean,
our ordinary belief that there are hands
is just silent on this. Um
you know, I mean, and of course we may
well have beliefs about these things. We
may believe that hands are composed of
particles, or that hands are composed of
ideas in the mind of God. But,
but those additional beliefs need not be
true in order for it to be true that we
have hands.
When we discovered that the the of hands
was different from what we thought, we
didn't conclude, "Oh, hands don't
exist." And and consider also, you know,
when we encounter people who have very
different metaphysical beliefs. Um I
don't know, like the Aztecs. They they
take it ultimately hands are made up of
very different things to what we believe
in. We don't We don't say, "Oh well,
those people deny the existence of
hands."
And, you know, what goes for hands goes
for most of the other ordinary objects
around us as well.
So, it seems that our beliefs about
ordinary objects do not presuppose any
particular metaphysical claims.
And this point is,
you know, an an important motivation for
veridicalism,
um because the idea is going to be,
well, these skeptical scenarios, what
they're really doing is what what would
what would happen if we would if we
discovered that we were in a skeptical
scenario, you know, if I discovered that
I was a brain in a vat, is that I would
be discovering something surprising
about the underlying nature of hands. I
would be discovering that hands are
actually composed of, you know,
electrical impulses created by a
supercomputer, but that's a that's a
discovery about the underlying
metaphysics of hands, and, you know, the
existence of hands is kind of tangential
to that.
So, as I said, there are many versions
of veridicalism.
Um
Chalmers' idea is a form of what's known
as structuralism.
Uh so, basically Chalmers says, all uh
this is in his article "Structuralism Is
a Response to Skepticism." He talks
about this at length. Uh so, his idea is
that um
all physical claims are equivalent to
structural claims, or at least all
claims about, you know, ordinary
physical objects are equivalent to
structural claims. So, you know, the
these are claims that use the the the
sort of physical language that
references you know, space, time, mass,
quantity, these these sorts of
ordinary object terms in that domain.
Now,
um you know, Chalmers has a a pretty
sort of technical view on, you know,
like meaning and language and all that
stuff. The The precise details of it are
not really that important
for our purposes, but the basic idea is
that ordinary physical object terms pick
out whatever it is that plays a certain
kind of role
in in the world and in our interactions
with the world.
So, again, we'll take the term hand,
right? Um the idea is is that hand is
referring to whatever it is that plays
the hand role. Um yeah, and this is a
kind of role that's that can be defined
in functional terms. Um the term hand
refers to whatever it is whatever that
thing is that's attached to the end of
an arm, that has five digits, that has
opposable thumbs, that can pick up and
manipulate objects, that's associated
with sensations of touch, temperature,
pain, uh that produces certain visual
impressions of shape and color when you
look at it, you know? So, like I open my
eyes, right? Like I'm opening my eyes
and then there's this there's this
there's this thing that has a certain
shape and a certain color, right? Like
that's that's what a hand is. Um so,
hand refers to
certain observable dispositions or to
whatever it is that realizes those
dispositions. A hand is whatever it is
that plays the hand role, where the hand
role is a matter of these structural
relations between things and structural
relations between things and
experiences.
Um
So, the structuralist response to
skepticism then is going to be that
whatever structure is present in the
common sense scenario is also present in
the corresponding skeptical scenario. Um
the common sense scenario is your
ordinary worldview, you know, it's this
idea that experiences are produced by
mind-independent physical objects
composed of fermions and bosons.
Um to any common sense scenario there
are these corresponding skeptical
scenarios like the brain in the vat, the
evil demon, whatever. In the common
sense scenario, the hand role is played
by
uh certain mind-independent physical
objects. Well, I mean,
you know, it's it's played by these
arrangements of fundamental particles
that obey certain laws of physics.
The world on this view has a kind of
causal structure such that certain
arrangements of fundamental particles
interact with each other in certain ways
um and then this bit some of these
interactions produce these appearances
within our uh experience.
In the brain in the vat scenario, the
hand role is played by electrical
impulses in a supercomputer that's
hooked up to a brain.
And
within the brain in the vat scenario,
this is going to replicate the relevant
part of the causal structure of the
common sense scenario. So, instead of it
being like interactions between, you
know,
arrangements of uh fundamental particles
and, you know, interactions between
fundamental particles in the brain, uh
it's going to be interactions between
these electric sets of electrical
impulses, interactions between
electrical impulses in the brain.
Um
what has the relevant causal powers in
the brain in the vat scenario is these
electrical impulses in the computer, but
it has the same relevant causal
structure. The hand role is still
instantiated.
So, as Chalmers puts it uh in in his
paper the structuralism as a response to
skepticism, he says,
"For every physical property of physical
objects in the actual world, there will
be a corresponding virtual property of
virtual objects in the simulation. This
will be a property of data structures
such as a value in a data array. If two
properties have a systematic causal
connection tying them together in the
actual world, the corresponding virtual
properties will have a systematic causal
structure in the simulation."
Um and moreover, both of these things
bring about the same experiences in
conscious observers. Um,
so this idea can be extended to other
skeptical scenarios. Um,
in the evil demon scenario, the hand
role is played by the actions of the
evil demon and the representations
within the evil demon's mind. So the
evil demon is going to be tracking your
experiences and ensuring that when you
decide to open your eyes, a specific
visual appearance will be created.
>> [clears throat]
>> Um,
which means the evil demon must
intend to produce the relevant visual
appearance in you and must remember what
that visual appearance is like. So
there's going to be a fairly complex
structure encoded in the evil demon's
mind and this structure is what's
causing your experiences.
And this structure corresponds in the
relevant kind of way to the causal
structure of physical objects in the
common sense scenario.
Um, and you know, I mean again, you can
I think pretty easily see how this is
going to extend to some of these other
skeptical scenarios. I just want to make
a brief note that
initially you might think that this is
similar to uh, Putnam's argument against
skepticism. I'm not going to discuss
this in detail here because I already
have a video on uh, Putnam's response to
the brain in the vat scenario. Uh, the
only point I want to make is that these
are not the same response, okay?
Putnam's conclusion is that is that
certain skeptical scenarios are
incoherent or meaningless, right? Like
on on Putnam's view, the brain in the
vat hypothesis can't really even be
expressed or thought about. Uh, and
that's very different from veridicalism
because the veridicalist is saying, "No,
these hypotheses are perfectly
meaningful and like I really might just
be a brain in a vat and I can't rule it
out." Um, the point is that even if I am
a brain in a vat, most of my beliefs are
true. The skeptical scenario is
meaningful, it's just well, it's just
not really a skeptical scenario, right?
So that's quite different from what
Putnam is saying, even though in some
ways, you know, the the points that are
being made about language are kind of
similar.
Um anyway, I'll I'll put a link up in
the comments to my uh video on Putnam.
Um just a quick advert, I do have a
Patreon. There's a whole bunch of bonus
videos on the Patreon that you can
access if you're interested. Also, I
have a PayPal. I mean, if you wanted to
just throw me some cash, uh it you know,
it helps um you know, these videos do do
take a lot of time to put together, so
you know, any every little helps, as
they say. All right, then. Um let's turn
to some concerns about veridicalism. Um
so, I mean, one general worry about
veridicalism, and you know, there's kind
of many ways that this worry can be
raised, is that it's going to have
pretty significant limits to the amount
of knowledge that it can save. Uh Grace
Grace Helton, in her article on being a
lonely brain in a vat, argues that
veridicalism just doesn't address the
problem of other minds. So, obviously,
you appear to be surrounded by various
other people, and you take yourself to
have relationships with many of them,
and and maybe some of the most important
events in your life will consist in your
relationships with other people. Uh now,
presumably, you you assume that these
other people are not just automatons,
right? They have minds like yours, and
indeed, it is the very fact that they
have minds like yours that that's what
makes possible the kind of shared
feelings and experiences that are part
of these, you know, relationships,
fulfilling relationships, right? You
love your girlfriend, and she loves you.
You have mutual feelings for one
another. If you were to learn that your
girlfriend just doesn't actually care
about you at all, and she has no
thoughts about you, well, you might find
that a little bit disturbing.
Okay. So, you know, lots of significant
things seem to involve our assumption
that other people have minds like ours.
Now, suppose you're a brain in a vat. If
veridicalism is right, what this means
is that there are real human bodies that
you can really interact with.
But, these bodies are not going to be
connected to other brains in vats. Um
indeed, depending on
how the brain in the vat program works,
these other bodies may not even be
realized most of the time. Maybe the
program only generates them when when
you're actually interacting with them.
Um
so, Halton suggests that okay, you know,
imagine a computer that uses a kind of
brute force program, as she puts it, one
which employs what is in effect a very
large lookup table to offer seemingly
sophisticated behavioral and linguistic
responses across all relevant domains.
But, anyway, I mean, it's just
that's that's only going to be happening
when you're actually interacting with
these other bodies. When you leave the
room, the other bodies just
you know, stop. Basically, they they
they kind of disappear. Um
So, anyway, uh
you know, it seems like at least at face
value, these these other bodies are not
going to have conscious experiences. Um
it's like when you, you know, have a
dream in which you encounter other
people. You know, maybe you dream that
you're, you know, you you have a a
loving girlfriend, but then when you
wake up, it's like, oh well, you know,
that was just a dream. Uh she she didn't
actually have any real feelings for me.
There wasn't a genuine reciprocal
relationship there.
Um
So, essentially, the worry about this is
that
veridicalism is base What veridicalism
is doing is basically saying, look,
the mere sort of appearances and
dispositions and relations between
things within our experience, that sort
of stuff is sufficient to secure the
truth of statements about ordinary
objects.
And you know, maybe that's plausible
when it comes to statements about
ordinary objects like, you know, hands
and tables and chairs.
But it looks much less plausible that
mere appearances and dispositions are
sufficient to
secure the truth of statements about
other minds.
Um you know, that that like the
statements about other minds can be true
just in virtue of
you know, that the sort of immediate
behavior that you see when you interact
with another person.
It doesn't look like that's going to be
enough to secure the truth of statements
about their minds. I mean, and that
would require a very kind of crude
behaviorism that probably wouldn't be
appealing to most people.
Um
I mean, again, just consider dream
characters, right? Do you Do you want to
say the dream characters are conscious?
That they have minds? Most people don't
want to say that. Um you're probably
reluctant to attribute any
mental states to them, any any mental
states whatsoever. So
you know, um
yeah, I mean, ultimately veridicalism,
if this is right, veridicalism is not
going to secure the truth of statements
about other minds. You need the right
kind of thing to be happening behind the
phenomena. Um and veridicalism doesn't
give you that.
Another potential limitation is that
it it's questionable whether
veridicalism can really save our
knowledge of the future. So suppose, for
instance, that you are a brain in a vat
that is part of a short-term experiment.
Maybe the brain was created only a week
ago, and it's only going to last another
day. Um now of course it has memories
that indicate a longer life, but those
memories are false. Or maybe you're an
entity in a short-term computer
simulation, or maybe an evil demon has
created you, but again, only for a short
period. Um or maybe, you know, your
current experience is something
analogous to a dream.
Where like very soon you're just going
to, you know, wake up. You haven't You
haven't been here for anywhere near as
long as it seems, and it's very shortly
going to come to an end.
So in all of these cases, it will seem
to you like you have existed in this
world for for long time, but that's just
an illusion. Your life has only actually
been, you know, a week, a day, just 5
minutes maybe. And and it's going to
come to an end very very soon. And with
it, of course, all of the
all of the all of the ordinary objects
around you are going to cease to exist
as well. Once the simulation ends, it's
not just that you die, the causal
structure that realizes all the, you
know, the the hands and legs and tables
and chairs, that's going to get shut
down as well.
Veridicalism
doesn't really seem to have much to say
about these scenarios.
Um
So, you know, you might say for
instance, well, the sun has risen for
billions of years and the sun will
continue to rise for billions of years
more. Um okay, well, I mean, if
veridicalism is right, there is really a
planet and there is really a sun, but
the timeline is wrong. And as as with
the case of minds, it really doesn't
seem plausible to say that mere
appearances like the the present
appearances and dispositions of things
are sufficient to secure the truth of
statements about the future. Uh so, when
I predict for instance that the sun will
rise tomorrow,
well, surely that's not true just in
virtue of like whatever memories and
present experiences support the
prediction. I mean, after all, like when
I you know, when I'm making a
prediction, right, a prediction about
something that has not yet happened, I
guess I'm part of what I'm assuming is
that I might in principle turn out to be
incorrect. Um So, like let's say I
Suppose I say that the sun will rise
tomorrow, and then later that day a
surprising cosmic disaster occurs which
destroys the sun. Well, you wouldn't
want to say that my earlier statement
was true just because I had memories and
experiences that indicated that the sun
would rise tomorrow.
For statements about the future to turn
out to be true, even on veridicalism,
the you know, the appearances need to
maintain the right kind of structure
into the future. But there are many
skeptical scenarios on which you just
you know you don't have a future. Um so
yeah, this seems like another case where
you know there's a there's some
knowledge that's not really saved by
veridicalism. I should note by the way
that Chalmers himself is very well aware
of these limitations.
Um you know, he he you know, he just
admits in you know, the article that
like look
there are so skeptical scenarios of like
different sizes. You know, you you can
kind of imagine like a on the one hand
on one extreme you've got like a
computer simulation that simulates the
entire universe and that's going to
secure a great deal of knowledge, but if
you have uh like a short-term simulation
a short-term simulation that involves
just one person. I mean there's going to
be much less knowledge available in
that's in that situation.
Um
so you know, Chalmers admits that this
is that the yeah, these limitations do
exist. But I mean I suppose the thing is
is that given these limitations we might
wonder whether veridicalism even in
principle could be successful as a
response to skepticism because you know,
I mean ultimately what's worrying about
skeptical scenarios is that they
challenge something that we care about.
And you might think well, how much do we
really care about inanimate objects in
our immediate present environment? I
mean that's not enough for genuine
social interaction. That's not enough
for the rationality of making plans for
the future. But that means you know, a
pretty big chunk of what you care about
is missing. I mean just think about you
know, how much of what's meaningful to
you is based on interacting with other
people or contributing to some sort of
long-term project. You know, maybe you
have a a goal for your career or you
know, even something simple like a goal
of you know, owning your own house one
day and working towards the goal of
owning your own house. I mean if you can
no longer rationally predict the future
you you know, you you're in a a
well, a very
a very different situation from what you
thought you were in. Um,
you know, I suppose is is the problem.
All right. Well, here's um
here's another issue for veridicalism,
which is um
you know, going to challenge the idea
that it can solve that it can actually
save any knowledge whatsoever. So,
recall that according to veridicalists,
the term hand basically refers to
whatever it is that tends to cause hand
hand appearances, you know, um whatever
it is that plays the hand role uh and
that's going to be a matter of
instantiating the right kind of causal
structure. So, something surely causes
these appearances within our experience,
right? Like I open my eyes and I see
this thing that looks like it has five
digits and so on. Something is causing
this visual appearance. I just I just
don't know what it is, right? Um
So, what's being assumed here is that
none of the skeptical scenarios
challenge causality.
But, that's pretty questionable. I mean,
for one thing, even independently of
arguments for skepticism, there are
actually many arguments against the idea
uh of realism about causality. I mean,
David Hume and Bertrand Russell have
both made arguments for causal
anti-realism that, you know, doesn't
really depend you know, that's not about
like any sort of general radical
skepticism. It There are arguments that
target causality in particular. Uh Kant
would argue that causality is only an
aspect of the phenomena. It can't be
attributed to the noumena, to the things
in themselves. The the point of this is
just
causality is independently questionable.
Even if you don't go for radical
skepticism, right? Like there are
there's a lot of philosophical views on
which
causality is thrown into question.
But, the point of that is
if you're entertaining skepticism,
you're surely going to be entertaining
the idea that well, Well, there's just
no causality. Maybe causality is just
one of these radically mistaken beliefs.
And and incidentally, there are in fact
skeptical scenarios that undermine our
beliefs in causality. Take the evil
demon scenario. So, I suggested earlier
that on veridicalism, many beliefs um
even if you were in the evil demon
scenario, many of your beliefs will turn
out to be true because the complex
structure encoded in the evil demon's
mind causes your experiences in the
right kind of way. Now, obviously, when
we imagine the evil demon, when we think
about how it works, we tend to think
about it in terms of the evil demon's
intentions and actions and how this
causally influences our perceptions.
But, it's not at all obvious that that
is the right way to think about it
because belief in causality may just be
another falsehood that the demon has
created in us. Indeed, remember that
when Descartes first introduced the
demon scenario, the point was that the
demon can influence the most basic
reason. Like, even when you reason, for
instance, that 1 + 1 = 2, it might be
that, you know, when you imagine 1 + 1
and then you perform that operation in
your head and you derive two, it might
be that the demon is interfering with
your thinking and you're being led
astray. Like, every step of inference,
every every inferential step can be can
be screwed up by the evil demon. Um
and so, if we can be mistaken about
basic arithmetic, then, you know, surely
we can we have we can be mistaken about
these more metaphysically loaded ideas
like causality.
Um and of course, you might say, "Well,
look, you know, if there are no genuine
causal relations, what's really going
on? You know, how do we account for the
coherence of experience? How can the
demon deceive us if he can't causally
influence us?" Well, I mean, you know,
who knows? But, uh
you know, it might just be that we're
not equipped with the right sort of
cognitive tools to even conceive of what
the world is like. You know, maybe we
are in a kind of the sort of situation
that Kant described where the noumena is
just totally incomprehensible to us. The
world in itself might just be something
completely beyond our comprehension. Um
you know, if this is if this seems
ridiculous, I I would point out actually
that you know, there are reports of
people who've taken drugs like DMT where
they'll sometimes say that actually the
kind of experience that you have is one
where these ideas of space, time,
causality, these things that we just
take for granted and you maybe can't
even see how they could you know, how
that could be false. Actually, there are
experiences where these concepts simply
don't apply. Um and so, yeah, maybe the
world is really like that. It's
incomprehensible.
Um
so, the point of this then is that
if this is right, veridicalism is only
going to work against a specific class
of skeptical scenarios.
Now,
you know, maybe the those skeptical
scenarios are the only relevant ones. Um
it might be argued that
non-causal skeptical scenarios can't
even be coherently conceived or maybe
they can be ruled out by other means or
whatever. Um but if they're on the
table, I mean, if the evil demon
scenario as Descartes conceived of it is
on the table, then it actually looks
like veridicalism just doesn't work at
all. Um
because
you know, ultimately, it's not even
going to it's not even going to save
your knowledge of ordinary objects in
the present environment because you're
not going to be able to, you know, say
that that it that it does have the same
sort of causal structure as on the
common sense model. That's the
challenge.
All right, then. So,
uh I want to now turn to There's an
interesting article by uh uh Yuval
Avnar. I hope I'm pronouncing his name
right. It's called Veridicalism and
Skepticism.
Um
and you know, I I'm I raised some
objections earlier where it it
essentially the point was, you know,
veridicalism seems like it maybe doesn't
save a lot of the knowledge that we care
about. And this point about the kind of
knowledge that we care about motivates
Avner's response.
So, Avner argues that even when it comes
to, you know, ordinary inanimate
objects, the problem with veridicalism
is that even if it successfully rebuts
the kind of the letter of the skeptical
argument, it doesn't defeat the worrying
implications of that argument.
So,
for many philosophers, skepticism is a
problem, right? The skeptical argument
implies something that is worrying or
unacceptable about our ordinary beliefs.
And this is what motivates us to debate
skepticism and to wonder how it is that
the skeptical challenge might be
answered. Now, the problem for
veridicalism is this, to quote Avner.
He says, "To try to solve the problem,
one might refute the argument. However,
if such a refutation implies that the
same implies that same worrying thing,
then one has not thereby solved the
problem. Rather, one has arrived at the
same problem via a different
commitment." And this is the position
that veridicalism is in, according to
Avner. So, the skeptic says, "Look, I
don't know whether I have hands." And
the veridicalist does technically avoid
this conclusion, but according to Avner,
they only avoid this conclusion by
committing us to something that is just
as worrying as the skeptical conclusion.
So, they haven't really solved the
problem. Now, before explaining Avner's
argument, I I I want to distinguish
veridicalism from a
a related response, um
but it's a different response, uh which
which I'm calling no problemism. Okay?
So, according to no problemism,
the skeptical argument just isn't a
problem in the first place, right? The
no problemist
accepts that skeptical scenarios are
coherent, they can't be ruled out, and
and she accepts that these scenarios
imply that we have no knowledge of the
world, that for all we know we're
massively deceived about how things are,
and so on. But the no problemist just
doesn't care. Skepticism is not a
problem to be solved. For the no
problemist, it doesn't matter whether or
not skepticism is true. Uh if if
skepticism were true, it would make no
difference to anything that is important
to the no problemist.
Right. So,
key point is that veridicalists are not
no problemists because veridicalists do
think that skepticism is a problem to be
solved. Veridicalists grant that that
that skepticism raises some sort of
worry, and they are trying to propose a
solution to it. So, with that in mind,
we need to think about well, what
exactly is the problem with skepticism?
Like, what's the worry that's being
raised by this? Okay.
So,
the idea is
>> [clears throat]
>> that the worry that's raised by the
skeptical argument is going to basically
be something that follows from this this
claim, right?
I don't know whether I have hands
because I might be a brain in a vat or a
demon victim or I might be dreaming,
etc., etc., right? I don't know whether
I have hands because I might be in one
of these scenarios. So, basically, the
world might be radically different from
how I believe it to be. I may be in a
state of deep ignorance about how the
world is. I I can imagine one day being
brought out of the vat and shown that,
you know, all of this life was just a
just an illusion. And and, you know,
and that's the that's the worry, right?
So, the veridicalist says, "Well,
regardless of whether any of these
skeptical hypotheses are true, I do know
that I have hands,
and I do know all of these things about
ordinary physical objects."
But she
she she defends this claim only by
endorsing the following claim.
I don't know whether these hands
are brain-in-a-vat appearances,
demon-induced appearances, dream
appearances, etc.
Now, Avnur's point is
if you find that skeptical conclusion to
be worrying, wouldn't it be kind of
weird not to find the veridicalist
conclusion worrying as well? Because it
seems like in some important sense, they
are saying the same thing, right? What
they are both expressing is this deep
ignorance about the way the world is.
What they're both expressing is the
following. They're both saying,
"I don't know whether the source of this
experience is an ordinary physical
object, a brain-in-a-vat computer, an
evil demon, a dream, etc."
And it's this ignorance that has always
been, uh, at least according to Avnur,
there's always been what people find
worrying about skepticism. So, Avnur
says, "Look, the veridicalist hasn't
really offered an alternative. They've
basically just reformulated the
skeptical conclusion. So, you know, they
so so okay, the skeptical conclusion no
longer uses words like knowledge or
whatever, but the point about massive
ignorance of the world remains.
Um
So, I mean, if we consider this from um
perhaps a slightly different point of
view,
right? If veridicalism is right, then
what that means is that the proposition
"There are hands" or "I have hands" is
true,
right? So, um I can uh
I I can legitimately apply the term hand
to to these things that I see when I
open my eyes. Regardless of whether any
skeptical scenarios are true, the
application conditions for the term hand
are satisfied, right? We we legitimately
term the apply the term hand to anything
that satisfies the following
disjunction: physical object caused hand
appearance, brain-in-a-vat caused hand
appearance, demon caused hand
appearance, etc. So, the veridicalist
basically gives us the right. She gives
us some sort of warrant
to talk in an ordinary way, even if we
are in skeptical scenarios. And thereby
she says, "Look, I've saved all of our
ordinary beliefs about the world." But
Avner says, "No, this just completely
misses the point of the skeptical
challenge."
Because here's the thing, what the
veridicalist offers is that ordinary
object terms are vindicated. She offers
us something about language, right? But
she still leaves us knowing pretty much
nothing about the way the world really
is.
So, you know, I suppose to drive home
this point that
you know, the vindication of ordinary
object language is tangential to
skepticism. It's worth considering that,
you know, you could have the view that
ordinary object terms fail to refer and
yet we actually know a great deal about
the world. Consider for instance
mereological nihilism. According to the
mereological nihilist, there are no
composite objects. There are no chairs,
no tables, no planets, no animals, et
cetera. There are only fundamental
particles arranged in all sorts of ways.
So, almost all of our ordinary beliefs
are strictly speaking false according to
the mereological nihilist. But
mereological nihilism is not usually
taken to be a skeptical hypothesis and
it's because the mereological nihilist
actually thinks we really do understand
pretty deeply. We understand what the
world is really like on a fundamental
level, you know. We just have to be
careful about how we phrase things so
that, you know, we're not referring to
composite objects. I mean, in in
principle it's possible to avoid
reference to composite objects even if
it's very difficult in practice.
But yeah, I mean, ordinary object terms
end up failing to refer according to the
mereological nihilist, but you know,
they're not skeptics, right? So,
skepticism the question of skepticism
and the question of, well,
like is ordinary language legitimate?
Are just they're just different
questions.
Um as Avna points out, historically
skepticism was not formulated in terms
of whether the application conditions
for ordinary object terms are satisfied.
Um in fact, arguably it wasn't even
formulated in terms of whether our
beliefs count as knowledge. Um David
Hume, for example, presented his
skeptical arguments in terms of how we
can determine the ultimate causes of the
perceptions of the mind. So, here's
Hume, uh I quote,
"By what argument can it be proved that
the perceptions of the mind must be
caused by external objects entirely
different from them, though resembling
them if that be possible, and could not
arise either from the energy of the mind
itself or from the suggestion of some
invisible and unknown spirit, or from
some other cause still more unknown to
us?"
It is a question of fact whether the
perceptions of the senses are produced
by external objects resembling them. How
shall this question be determined?
Uh notice there's nothing there about
like, "Well, is it true that you have
hands?" Right? That's just not how Hume
is framing this at all. Um what worries
him is that is this is this thought that
we might just be completely ignorant
about what the kind of like underlying
causes of our sensations are actually
like.
So,
um
basically the veridicalist has has
conflated
one way, modern way of stating the
skeptical argument for what skepticism
really is, you know, and and what the
real
underlying challenge of skepticism is.
So, Avna um does give a a bit more
detail about exactly why it is that
veridicalism fails. And he says the
basic reason for the failure of
veridicalism is that it leaves open the
same possibilities as skepticism. I
think the point that he's making here is
is that
learning about the world involves
narrowing down epistemic possibilities,
right? So, let's say that I see what
appears to be an animal outside my
window. Like, there's something moving
and I think, "Ah, it's a It's an animal,
right? It's probably an animal moving
outside my window." But, it's just in
the corner of my eye and and at the
moment, like, I don't know whether it's
a cow, a dog, a cat, a bird, or
whatever. So, then I kind of turn my
head, I look a little closer, and I
notice that it has a comparatively
smaller size,
and that rules out the possibility of a
cow. So, like, the cow possibility has
been ruled out.
All right. Well, it could be a dog, cat,
bird. So, then I look a bit closer,
and I see I see the distinctive features
of a cat, right? So, I I see the uh you
know, the whiskers and the pointed ears
and the long tail and so on. I'm like,
"Ah, that's that's a cat."
So, I've ruled out the dog possibility,
the bird possibility, all these other
animal possibilities, ruled out. But, of
course, I still there's still various
possibilities about, well, what cat is
it? I know that Sienna and Pearl live
nearby. Um or it could be a newcomer,
perhaps a new a new cat has arrived in
the neighborhood. Um
so, which cat is it? Well, I know that
Pearl is a diluted tortoiseshell cat, a
gray a kind of grayish color, but this
cat has more vivid colors. So, okay, it
can't be Pearl.
With each of these observations, right,
I'm I'm ruling out possibilities. I'm
narrowing down the possibilities. And of
course, I can keep investigating and
narrowing down the possibilities
further. Um but that's that's what it is
to to, you know, actually learn stuff
about the world.
So, the skeptic suggests that
perhaps all of your ordinary beliefs
um
are are based on these mere appearances,
and there's something behind these
appearances that is radically different
from what the appearances themselves
suggest or from what you assume, right?
So, at best, I know that these these
hand appearances are caused either by
physical objects or by a brain in a vat
computer or by an evil demon or by a
dream, et cetera. And this This what
motivates the initial worry about
skepticism. You have this wide range of
possibilities. The veridicalist does not
put me in a position to learn anything
more about the world than this. I still
can't rule out any of these
possibilities. All I can do, given these
appearances of hands, all I can do is
legitimately apply the English term
hand.
The skeptic and the veridicalist give
you the same set of possibilities.
They they merely describe them
differently.
Right? So, the veridicalist just kind of
broadens the things to which the term
hand correctly applies.
But, as Avram says,
what matters when it comes to what is
going on in the world is which
possibilities might be actual,
not how those possibilities are
described.
Um
we have, you know, many many beliefs
about hands. Like, you know,
my hands were not caused to exist by an
evil demon manipulating my mind. What
caused my hands to exist? Well, I'll
tell a story about biological
development, and I can trace the causal
lines back in various ways, but none of
these are going to terminate in an evil
demon. Um the skeptical scenario raises
this worry that like, yeah, well, maybe
the world is very different to what you
initially thought. And the skeptic
expresses this worry by saying, for all
you know, you have no hands.
Um
the veridicalist does not express this
worry as a worry about the existence of
hands, but she can express it as a worry
about the nature of hands. Like, are
they biological objects or demon-induced
images or whatever? I mean, Avram would
say, look, these are just two different
formulations of the same what is
actually the same skeptical problem.
Um so, I want to just present one more
kind of little argument for Avram's
view,
um which is to consider what you might
say if you were to wake up from your
current experiences. So, the analogy
here is is of course to dreams. You wake
up and you realize it was only a dream,
or maybe you become lucid during the
dream. And then, you know, you that's
when you realize it's a dream while
you're still dreaming. The skeptical
challenge is that your relation to your
waking environment may be analogous to
your relationship to the dream
environment. One day, you might wake up
from it. Now, think about what happens
when you wake up from a dream, right? We
we're tempted to say
the dream objects were not real.
Um and maybe some kinds of veridicalism
are committed to denying this. So, you
know, when you dream that you're
stroking Sienna the cat, you know, maybe
there's like somebody could come along
and say, "Well, you know, you really
were stroking a cat in that dream,
right? Like you you really in when
you're dreaming, you really do control a
pair of hands, and those hands really do
stroke a cat." But, you know, that's
rather irrelevant, isn't it? Because
real or not, what happens when you wake
up from a dream is that it totally loses
its significance. All of the things that
mattered in the dream world no longer
matter. The dream world seems
insubstantial and irrelevant compared to
the waking experience. Maybe you dreamt
that you were a great emperor living in
luxury, but that's not going to
alleviate your waking concern that you
recently lost your job and you can't pay
the rent tomorrow. Maybe you dreamt that
you were being chased by a lion, right?
But then all of your fears vanish when
you're you're in the comfy sheets of the
warm bed, right? So, so the thought is,
"Look, maybe my relationship to this
environment right now is like my
relationship to the dream world. One day
I'm going to wake up, and it's going to
lose its significance entirely." And
veridicalism does nothing to help with
that worry. And again, I I it's worth
noting, some people report actually
having that kind of experience. There
are certain types of meditation where
the way that people are inclined to
describe the experiences that occur is
that, you know, they they wake up, and
then they kind of have this direct
realization that all of this was an
illusion. Some people who take drugs
like DMT report radically different
perceptual experiences accompanied by
the sense that what they're experiencing
there is the real world and that their
whole previous life was an illusion. You
know, so so these sorts of experiences,
these kind of meditative things or the
DMT experiences, they're often described
as having a feeling of like
veridicality, you know? Um they they
have a greater vivacity, a greater
veridicality than ordinary perception.
So it seems at least, you know, there's
a possibility that, you know, you may
well be confronted with an experience um
of just all of this of of waking up from
all of this and then all of this losing
its significance. And it's very hard to
see how veridicalism can can help with
that. All right, so I want to end with
just a summary of I I suppose um
the kind of general point. Um
The thought is this.
If my ignorance about the existence of,
I guess what we could call like standard
biological hands, is a problem, right?
Uh if my ignorance regarding the
underlying nature of things is a
problem, then veridicalism doesn't
actually solve the problem. Um
On the other hand, if it's not a
problem, if my ignorance regarding the
underlying nature of things is not a
problem,
then there is no problem for
veridicalism to solve. Um So
veridicalism would be redundant. This
this would be the position of the no
problemist. Remember I I drew that
distinction between veridicalism and no
problemism.
The uh the no problemist would say with
respect to whether hands are biological
objects or BI brain in a vat machine
programs or whatever. Look, there's no
problem. It doesn't make any difference
either way. But if that's your response,
then veridicalism itself is not really
doing any work in that response. Uh
veridicalism does not does not itself
show that um
ignorance about the nature of things is
is insignificant. Um So yeah, if if the
skeptical challenge is a problem,
veridicalism doesn't solve it. Um
it may be that the skeptical challenge
just isn't a problem, but then that does
look like a different uh response is
being made.
Um so I suppose I have been rather
critical of the Ridiculist in this
video,
but you know, I still think it's an
interesting response and
you know, I hope you found the video
interesting and I'm going to end it
there. So thanks for watching. Bye
everybody.