and uh we are about to start our first
keynote lecture.
I would like to introduce our first
keynote speaker, Professor Robert
Brandon
and he is a distinguished professor at
the University of Pittsburgh, a fellow
of the center for philosophy of science,
a fellow of American Academy of Arts.
and science and a fellow of British
Academy.
He's a recipient
of the award awan foundation
distinguished achievement in human
humanities award as well as Alexander
Bonghberg
and the license mayor research award.
His research spans the philosophy of
language, the philosophy of mind and the
philosophy of logic with a particular
expertise in German idealism, new
pragmatism and the philosophy of cells.
Today he will share with us his latest
reflection on cells. The title of his
talk is sell
and the structure of the mind
independent world. The presentation will
last for one hour followed by two 20
minutes question and answer session. So
please join me in welcome professor
Brandon.
>> Thank you so much Shiaun. [sighs]
At the heart of Kant's transcendental
idealism is his restriction of
conceptual structure to the products of
the activities of concept using knowing
and acting subjects.
The world considered as independent of
those activities. The numinal world of
things as they are in themselves does
not exhibit the specifically conceptual
structure that our discursive activities
impose on the phenomenal world of things
as they are for us.
Sellers agrees with K in excluding from
the world as it is independent of our
discursive activities both universals
and propositions.
For him the world in the narrow sense is
a world of things not of facts.
Seller's argument for this onlogically
nominalist conclusion is quite different
from the path that Kant follows to his
own version of conceptual phenomenalism
which is his transcendental idealism.
Seller's argument turns on his
neoarnappian analysis of concepts such
as property and proposition as
essentially metalinguistic.
This argument lies at the center of his
effort to revitalize the core of content
transcendental idealism for philosophy
after the linguistic turn.
The interplay it articulates between
Sers's scientific realism and his
conceptual phenomenalism is subtle and
intricate. My main purpose here is to
reconstruct the path that takes Sers to
his specifically nominalist version of
conceptual phenomenalism at the
transcendental level and to illuminate
the relations between it and his
realistic scientific naturalism about
the empirical world.
But in order to understand the issue in
the form in which Kant bequeathed it to
sellers and to see why it matters, it'll
be helpful for us to begin even further
back. So I'm going to start with a brief
broadstroke rational reconstruction of
what I see as the two big transformative
episodes in the prior history of our
philosophical understanding of the
appearance reality distinction that set
the stage for what sellers makes of
Kant's transcendental radicalization of
that distinction.
The scientific revolution of the 17th
and 18th century radically transformed
our conception of the relation between
appearance and reality.
The new physics pioneered by Galileo and
Decart and raised to a powerful
systematic pinnacle by Newton achieved
its unprecedented explanatory successes
by redescribing the natural world in a
variety of mathematical vocabularies.
This decisive advance in the scientific
conception of reality was accompanied by
a radical metamorphosis in the
philosophical understanding of the
relation between that reality and its
appearance to the human subjects who had
come to understand physical reality so
much better by deploying these new
vocabularies.
A key element of early modern
philosophers response to the rise of the
new science was to move from thinking of
appearance in terms of its resemblance
to reality to thinking of it in terms of
its representation of reality.
The home of the appearance reality
distinction lies in specifically
perceptual appearances.
Foritical perceptual experience in which
things appear as they really are is not
only a necessary condition of empirical
knowledge but also its principal source.
However, perceptual appearances also
sometimes mislead by diverging from
reality. The circular coin looks
elliptical. The distant tower is larger
than it appears. The color of the cloth
turns out not to be what in bad lighting
we took it to be. Since the Greeks, the
idea had been that at least when things
go well, the way things appear to us
resembles the way they really are on the
model of pictures.
Resemblance here can be understood as
the sharing of some properties, as a
realistic portrait might reproduce the
shapes of facial features or the color
of clothing. Where the picturing shapes
and colors replicate the shapes and
colors of what's pictured, reality
appears as it is. where they diverge,
appearances can be misleading.
The rise of the new science exposes the
inadequacy of the resemblance model of
appearance.
On Capernacus's account, the reality
behind the appearance of a stationary
Earth and a revolving sun is a rotating
Earth and a stationary sun. Being at
rest and being in motion are opposites,
incompatible properties that don't have
anything in common. rotating and
revolving, spinning and orbiting are
both circular kinds of motion, but quite
different ones. The general lesson was
that astronomical reality was nothing
like its appearance to us.
Galileo's reading of what he called the
book of nature written in the language
of mathematics finds the best way of
getting a grip on the reality of motion
to be by manipulating geometrical
appearances.
For him, a period of time shows up as
the length of a line and acceleration as
the area of a triangle.
One could force the assimilation of
temporal to spatial extension into the
form of resemblance's shared property.
But no such procrustian maneuver will
make the resemblance model sufficient or
even helpful in understanding the
relations between the real acceleration
of a falling body and its ge geometrical
appearance as the area of a triangle.
Deart sees that [clears throat] making
sense of mathematical appearances of
physical phenomena requires a model more
abstract than the traditional perception
inspired notion of resemblance.
He crafts a concept of representation
for this purpose.
The paradigm of representational
relations are to be found in his
algebraic geometry.
He thinks of material reality as the
realm of extension and takes it to
consist in geometrical properties, thus
radicalizing Galileo by giving an
ontological twist to his use of
geometrical vocabulary.
For Decart, the real geometrical world
of shapes and motions can best be
represented by discursive sequences of
symbols in the form of algebraic
equations.
The equations x^2 + y^2 = 1 and x= y do
not at all resemble. They're in no sense
replicas of the circle and the line they
represent. But they do make it possible
to reason about those figures. For
instance, by computing the two points of
intersection of that circle and that
line.
But how is that looser, more abstract
representational relation to be
understood?
Giving up the bonds of resemblance by
allowing representatives to
representings to be so radically
dissimilar to what they represent opens
up a new skeptical possibility. The
reality is radically different from how
it appears in representations of it. If
representings and representatives don't
need to share properties, what does
connect them? Decart didn't offer much
of an account. Mental states and
episodes, he thought, are intrinsically
representational. It's their nature to
be tonquum re as if of things as it's
the nature of physical things to be
extended in the sense of geometrically
describable as having a shape, size and
state of motion or rest.
It was Spinosa whose first book was on
Decart who figured out the concept of
representation that was implicit in
Decart's motivating paradigm of analytic
geometry.
The key is that as Spinosa puts it,
quote, the order and connection of ideas
is the same as the order and connection
of things.
Equations can represent geometrical
figures because the whole system of
equations is isomeorphic to the whole
system of figures with, for instance,
simultaneous solutions of equations
corresponding to the intersections of
lines.
That's why algebraically manipulating
equations is intelligible as reasoning
about geometrical figures.
Given the global isomorphism, the order
and connection of linear strings of
symbols that's the same as the order and
connection of extended plane figures.
The equation x^2 + y^2 = 1 can play the
same functional role in the world of
equations that the circle it thereby
counts as representing plays in the
world of geometrical figures.
According to this story, the resemblance
model was not wrong to take the sharing
of properties to be essential to the
ofess invoked by talk of appearances of
material reality.
Its mistake, the source of its
expressive limitations, was to restrict
attention to local properties conceived
atomistically.
Properties, elements of picturing of
picturings and what is pictured could
have regardless of what properties other
systematically related elements had.
The wider scope of the new
representational model is due to the
holistic character of its appeal to
global isomorphisms which make visible
functional correlations between items in
the two systems that might have quite
different atomistic material properties.
The new more abstract and expressively
powerful representational model of the
intentional nexus between appearance and
reality develops the older, more
concrete resemblance model by shifting
attention to the larger relational
structures whose individual elements can
be understood to play the functional
roles of represented and representing in
virtue of the global isomorphism of
those structures.
Representings and represented are still
understood to share properties but
properties of a new functional kind
intelligible only globally in terms of
relations to other representings or
represented.
This metaconceptual sea change from
understanding the appearance reality
distinction in terms of the atomistic
model of resemblance to using the more
holistic model of representation
introduced by Decart is the first big
episode that I need to have on the table
in order to introduce my topic.
The second is Kant's further step away
from the original perceptual paradigm to
focus on specifically conceptual
appearances.
Deart's new notion of representation was
sufficiently capacious to encompass both
concepts and percepts, thoughts and
sensations. His successors, rationalists
and empiricists alike, had tried out the
strategy of treating these two kinds of
representations as extremes along a
single spectrum.
Though they developed different
understandings of the common dimension
along which different sorts of
representings are arrayed, both schools
saw thoughts and sensations as tied
together by a variety of intermediate
cases that make up the unifying spectrum
of which there are extremes.
But for Kant, this quantitative scaling
approach is an unsatisfactory framework
in which to analyze the qualitatively
different sorts of contributions to
empirical knowledge made by
representations of the two kinds.
Those differences in function are
sufficiently stark, he thinks, to
justify treating them as the products of
wholly distinct cognitive faculties.
The home of the holistic understanding
of representation in terms of global
isomorphism between representings and
represented is Decart's analytic
geometry which operates at the
conceptual level. If and in so far as
the resemblance model of shared local
properties still provides traction at
the perceptual level, there would be a
substantial structural difference
between perceptual and conceptual
connections between knowing mind and
known world.
Kant's bold strategy is to understand
the functional division of labor between
what he now constrs as complimentary
cognitive faculties hyamorphically
with sensibility contributing empirical
content and understanding contributing
the intelligible conceptual form of
empirical cognitions
and he accordingly faces a new question.
What does it mean to say that in the
representings that are the appearance of
represented reality, empirical content
shows up in specifically conceptual
form?
To address this question adequately,
Kant needs to rethink the wider realm of
discursive activities in general within
which concepts play their distinctive
functional role.
That realm includes both the application
of concepts in judgments and the use of
judgments in reasoning. Here he could
help himself to the logical tradition.
The scholastics seconded by the Port
Royale logicians envisaged a
methodological hierarchy relating these
components.
Its most basic level is a doctrine of
concepts particular in general. On top
of that is built a doctrine of judgments
classified according to the kind of
classifying and classified concepts they
deploy.
And on top of that is constructed a
doctrine of inferences codified in the
form of syllogisms classified according
to the kinds of judgments that serve as
their premises and conclusions.
In order to adapt and extend this
structure to address not only
traditional general logic, but also what
Kant called transcendental logic, which
is tasked with understanding the
specifically representational dimension
of concept use in the light of the
holistic lesson Spinosa had taught about
the importance of the systematic order
and connection of ideas to understanding
representation,
Kant needed to turn that logical
tradition on its head.
Wilfried Sers said about this crucial
move. Kant was on the right track when
he insisted that just as concepts are
essentially and not accidentally items
which can occur in judgments, so
judgments and then indirectly concepts
are essentially and not accidentally
items which can occur in reasonings or
arguments. End of the sellers quote. In
fact, Kant recruits the structural
elements of the traditional atomistic
bottomup account in the service of a
holistic functional top-down account of
discursiveness.
Concepts, he says, are functions of
judgment. They must be understood in
terms of the role they play in
activities of judging.
Judgments, not concepts, are the minimal
units of discursive awareness.
What following linenets he calls a
perception.
Judgments are indeed, as the tradition
added, applications of concepts. But
we're to understand applying concepts in
terms of an antecedent understanding of
what judging is, not the other way
around.
At the center of Kant's revolutionary
reconceptualization of the discursive is
his new account of the activity of
judging. He understands judging as
taking it up a distinctive kind of
normative stance.
understanding un undertaking a
responsibility committing oneself. He
further understands the normative status
taken on in judging as a kind of task
responsibility, a commitment to do
something, to engage in specific kinds
of activities.
Concepts are then to be made
intelligible as rules for determining
what one is taking responsibility for or
committing oneself to by making the
judgments that are the applications of
those concepts.
On this account, [clears throat] what
one becomes responsible for doing in
making a judgment is integrating it into
a constellation of doxastic commitments
that has a distinctive kind of unity, a
rational systematic unity.
One obligation undertaken in endorsing a
new claim is securing the coherence of
one's commitments by extruding
rationally incompatible ones from the
ensemble.
Another is to expand the system by
acknowledging the consequences of one's
commitments and by identifying other
judgments that justify one's commitments
by providing reasons for them.
Constellations of commitments governed
by the critical implative and
justificatory rational task
responsibilities have the unity Kant
sees as distinctive of our perception
that is discursive specifically
conceptual awareness sapience not merely
sentience.
His generic term for the rational
normgoverned discursive activities that
confer conceptual form is synthesis.
The conceptual contents of judgments,
the most basic kind of conceptual
representation,
are their potentials for being
integrated into holes having this sort
of systematic synthetic unity.
Rational synthetic activity results,
Kant tells us, in the transcendental
unity of our perception.
It's a transcendental unity in the sense
studied by transcendental logic. a unity
that makes intelligible the
representational dimension of judgment
and discursive understanding in general.
The broadly pragmatist challenge that K
undertakes is to derive an account of
the relations between representing
appearances and represented realities
from such a top-down holistic functional
account of the activities and processes
that structure the rational normgoed
conceptual order and connection of
ideas.
By elaborating [clears throat] in this
way the underlying idea of conceptual
form as conferred by role in activities
of reasoning K crafted a powerful new
conception of the conceptual. It
includes an original account of what any
subject looking ahead we can think of
computers must be able to do in order to
count as thinking that is to count as
aware in a way that essentially involves
discursive that is conceptual
understanding.
That's a perception being appeared to in
a distinctively conceptual sense of
appearance.
These ideas were of the utmost
significance for subsequent German
idealism and later American pragmatism
starting with purse. And my main topic
for the rest of this talk is how sellers
developed and deployed these ideas to
address issues we still wrestle with
today.
But already in the form in which Kant
brought them, a disadvantage becomes
visible of tying conceptual form so
closely to the reasoning activities of
apperceiving subjects.
For however successful or promising a
conrle of conceptual form in terms of
role in reasoning might be as an account
of the conceptual form of appearances,
it seems in principle restricted to
accounting for conceptual representings.
It's not clear on this account what it
could even mean for the reality that
appearance represents also to have or be
in conceptual form. How could conceptual
form in this sense be the order and
connection that's shared by the
systeming of representings and the
system of represented on the decart
inspired spinosist holistic conr of
representation?
On the face of it, things in the
objective world do not play functional
roles in rational practices of
acknowledging how some judgments provide
reasons for and against others.
Understanding the conceptual form of
judgments or judgable contents to
consist in the role they play in such
normgoed rational activities restricts
con conceptual form to the appearance
side of the appearance reality
distinction.
We can characterize any view that
restricts conceptual articulation to the
realm of appearance conceptual
phenomenalism.
And by contrast, we can use the term
conceptual realism to describe accounts
of conceptual structure that discern it
on both ends of the relation between
discursive representings and what they
represent. In these terms, Kant is a
conceptual phenomenalist.
Of course, he fully understands and
enthusiastically embraces this
conclusion. It's the core of his
transcendental idealism.
Since conceptual form is for him
exclusively the product of the rational
activities of the faculty of the
understanding, it follows that it's
restricted to our representings.
It can characterize the reality the
representings that constitute discursive
appearances represent only as
represented. That is only as it exists
in and according to those representings,
not as a matter of deep principle how
what is represented is in itself. that
is apart from its relations to
activities of representing it. As I put
the point a bit earlier on the contian
conception of the conceptual we don't
even understand what it would mean for
reality as it is apart from our
representing activities to be in
conceptual shape. That's why the world
as we conceptually represent it in our
judgments and beliefs cannot for be
understood to be transcendentally real.
That is as being what what we take it to
be uh only in our representings of sorry
it must be thought of as only ideal
transcendentally and real only
empirically that is as being what we
take it to be only in our representings
of it.
Conceptual phenomenalism in the form of
transcendental idealism is entailed by
the conjunction of Spinosa's holistic
functional account of the form shared by
veritical systems of representings and
what they represent with Kant's account
of the conceptual form of discursive
representings in terms of the role they
play in reasoning activities of
representers.
With this claim, I've at last arrived at
the principal question that's the
subject of the rest of my remarks here.
That's how Sers finds himself obliged to
combine his robustly naturalistic
scientific realism with a distinctive
and original version of conceptual
phenomenalism which restricts conceptual
form to the realm of appearance in the
sense of products of our rational
representational activity.
[clears throat and snorts]
Kant explicitly recoils from one
strategy for reconciling conceptual
realism with the restriction of the
conceptual to representings.
That's the view that represented reality
consists entirely of representings. That
the world is thinkable because it
consists of thinkings. He rejects both
what he calls the subjective idealism of
Barkclay with its single divine world
thinker as the source of representable
representings and linenets's
monadological plenum of represented
representers.
Sellers agrees with Kant in spurning
these extravagant approaches. Addressing
these issues after the linguistic turn,
Sellers crafts a bold new metal
linguistic argument for transcendental
idealism in the form of a conceptual
phenomenalism.
And this is the solarian argument I want
to reconstruct.
The constellation of ideas that emerges
from this exercise is central to his
thought generally.
Roy reports that when asked in
conversation what he hoped the result of
his work would be. Sellers replied he
hoped to usher analytic philosophy from
its human phase to its Kantian phase.
Although sellers's debt to Kant is
manysided, what he makes specifically of
Kant's transcendental idealism lies at
its core.
From a passage I cited above from
sellers on Kant on inference, judgment
and concept, it should come as no
surprise that sellers like Kant is a
conceptual phenomenalist.
Both understand concepts in terms of
their role in judgment in the sense of
judgings.
Sellers is explicitly an inferentialist
about concepts, identifying them as
inferential roles. For him, grasp of a
concept is always mastery of the use of
a word. The space of reasons is for him
the space of justifying and being able
to justify one's claims. It contrasts
with the space of causes because the
space of reasons is an abstraction from
practices of reasoning.
From this point of view, it makes no
sense, sellers thinks, to understand the
objective world in the sense of the
world construed as independent of
thought and talk about it as in
conceptual shape. Sellers must reject
the tractarian conception of a world of
facts.
For him, such a conception must be
fundamentally mistaken projection of our
activity into the environment in and on
which we act.
But sellers's view here is complex and
only confusion will result from failure
to appreciate its exact internal
structure. For sellers develops Kant's
ideas in two different ways, both of
which are avowedly sharply revisionary.
One understands transcendental idealism
in terms of scientific realism and the
other in terms of ontological
nominalism.
on the issue we're focusing on.
Scientific realism is, as I'll shortly
argue, a form of conceptual realism,
while onlogical nominalism is a form of
conceptual phenomenalism.
So there's a danger of understanding
these two views as contradictory or at
the very least as being in substantial
tension with one another. They are not.
Further, when it's noticed that the
understanding of Kant's transcendental
idealism as scientific realism is the
topic of Sers's 1965 lock lectures
published as science and metaphysics
while the reading of it in terms of
onlogical nominalism is propounded
principally in Ser's 1974 Dwey lectures
published as not naturalism and
ontology. The idea is likely to arise
that Sers changed his mind on a
fundamental issue, discarding the one
view in favor of the other. He did not.
Both articulate lines of thought he
endorsed already in the late 1950s and
never relinquished. But to see how
they're related, we'll need to proceed
with some care.
Seller's scientific realism is
explicitly laid out or at least
announced in his 1956 masterpiece,
Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind,
and substantially fleshed out in the
programmatic 1960 essay, Philosophy and
the Scientific Image of Man, which he
chose as the lead essay in his signature
collection, Science and Perception and
Reality.
From the beginning, his scientific
realism involved two claims of very
different status.
The first is the denial that the
distinction between concepts with
observational uses and purely
theoretical concepts marks an onlogical
distinction of kinds of things.
Most proximally, this negative thesis is
directed at instrumentalist philosophers
of science who take observables to be
real and claims about them to be true
and false. Well, theoretical objects are
invidiously re relegated to the status
of mere posits and claims about them
thought of as a valuable only as to how
useful it is to endorse them so as to
systematize observations.
Sellers rejects this application of what
he elsewhere calls the Platonic
principle, according to which
epistemological differences,
accessibility to sense rather than
intellect, reflect differences of
onlogical kind.
For him, observable and theoretical
entities are methodologically distinct
in that we find out about them
epistemically in different ways by
observation or only by inference. But
this difference does not for him mark a
difference of kind of object only of
ways of knowing them. Seller's argument
is that the very same object can change
status starting out as accessible only
inferentially hence as purely
theoretical but eventually becoming
observable.
In the 1840s, Urban Lever used Newtonian
mechanics to analyze perturbations in
the orbit of Uranus and predict the
position of the then undiscovered planet
Neptune. When telescopes observationally
ver verified his predictions, the
onlogical status of Neptune did not
change. We just added another mode of
epistemic accessibility to it. The point
is that things we find out about purely
inferentially can be as real as the ones
we can already observe.
Scientific realism as the denial of
instrumentalism rejects the onlogical
privileging of observable over
theoretical that is only inferentially
accessible entities.
But already in EPM sellers also endorses
a much stronger positive form of
scientific realism. It's epitomized in a
passage that's come to be known as the
scientia menora. quote in the domain of
describing and explaining the world
science is the measure of all things of
what is that it is and of what is not
that it is not.
Sellers identifies modern science as
distinguished by its postulation of
unobservables that is purely theoretical
entities. Where the negative thesis of
scientific realism merely denies
instrumentalism,
the positive thesis of a scientific
realism turns it on its head by
ontologically privileging the
theoretical posits of eventual or ideal
natural sciences as the reality that
explains the observable appearances that
make up what he calls the manifest image
of pre- theoretical common sense.
The basic strategy of seller science and
metaphysics is to develop a successor
conception to Kant's transcendental
idealism based on the second stronger
scientific realist way of understanding
the relations between empirical
appearance and the reality behind it.
Sellers says, "I shall tip my hand by
saying that the true ground for the
transcendental ideality of the
perceptual world lies in the distinction
between perceptual physical objects and
the objects of theoretical science, a
distinction which was blurred by Kant."
End of the quote. Scientific theories
are the measure of all things for
sellers in the sense that they're
authoritative about what there really
is, what it is that appears to us in the
non-inferentially elicited deliverances
of observation.
The key difference between Sers's
scientific realism and Kant's
transcendental idealism is that since
both the manifest image and the
scientific image are through and through
conceptually articulated, he's
recommending a kind of transcendental
conceptual idealism.
He says, but why should we not be
transcendental realists? Why should we
hold that the essa of the material world
is kipi? more accurate more accurately
that it exists only in actual and
obtainable representings. I'm going to
defend a closely related thesis. End of
the quote. Sellers realizes there's room
for confusion here since the original
Kian view that he's starting with is a
form of conceptual phenomenalism. He
says, quote, "The thesis I wish to
defend but not ascribe to Kant, though
it's very much a phenomenalism in the
content rather than the Barklayan sense,
is that although the world we
conceptually represent in in experience
exists only in actual and obtainable
representings of it, we can say from a
transcendental point of view, not only
that existence in itself accounts for
this obtainability by virtue of having a
certain analogy with the world we
represent, but also that in principle we
rather than God alone can provide the
cash.
We are in principle in a position to
compare things in themselves with their
observable appearances because
scientific theories no less than
observable facts are conceptually
articulated and hence graspable by us.
The gulf seller sees in Kant is the
difference between the conceptually
structured representings and
non-conceptual represented.
The scientific realist version of
constrcendental idealism admits no such
gulf. [gasps]
A large part of the task of science and
metaphysics whose subtitle is variations
on contient themes is to show how much
sense can be made of kenter enterprise
by a scientific realist reading that
gives up the unknowability of things in
themselves.
The conceptually realistic version of
transcendental idealism is scientific
realism is not seller's final word.
However, in his 1974 Dwey lectures at
the University of Chicago, Sis
introduces a concept of reality that's
more demanding than that of scientific
realism.
He says, I shall go on to argue that
although there are attributes, there
really are no attributes. It'll be
remembered that the qualification really
indicates that a philosophical point is
being made. from the ordinary sense of
really of course there really are
attributes. This argument will go hand
in hand with a theory of predication
which will strengthen the bite of the
claim that although there are attributes
properties there really are no
attributes. End of the quote. The final
lecture of the original three titled the
importance of being dispensable
rehearses a dialectic between pltonism
and nominalism about universals.
Seller's own position is that of the
nomalist. He concludes, I can only hope
that enough has been said to strengthen
the claim that a naturalistic ontology
must be a nominalist ontology. Quote,
the core of that nominalist ontology is
the view that patch vidkinstein the
extringuistic domain consists of objects
not of facts. To put it bluntly,
propositional form belongs only in the
linguistic and conceptual orders. End of
the quote from sellers. The nominalist
reality is a world exclusively of
particulars containing no facts so no
conceptual structure which for sellers
is equivalent to there being no
universals characterizing those
particulars.
Sellers here is seconding skepticism
about a world about a view of the world
as consisting of facts as something like
sentenceshaped chunks of reality.
In these lectures, Seller's argument for
a nominalist ontology takes the form of
what he calls a nominalist theory of
representation.
Such a theory is nominalistic in that it
maintains that only what can in in a
strict sense be named or referred to
represented by representings that are
genuine names.
Before considering the form of that
argument which occupies the bulk of
these lectures as delivered, a couple of
observations are in order concerning the
relations between Sers's ontological
nominalism and the choice between
conceptual nominalism, sorry, conceptual
realism and conceptual phenomenalism
that we've seen Kant bring into focus.
The first is that this kind of
ontological nominalism entails
conceptual phenomenalism.
Conceptual articulation in the form of
propositional content, particulars as
exhibiting properties or standing in
relations. Conceptually structured facts
are excluded from the extr linguistic
domain and relegated exclusively to what
we saw sellers call the linguistic and
conceptual orders.
Scientific realism by contrast is a form
of conceptual realism. The world of the
scientific image is a world of facts
specifiable in the theor theoretical
language of ideal natural sciences
rather than facts specifiable in the
ordinary empirical descriptive
observational vocabulary of the manifest
image. That's why on the scientific
realist conception of the real as the
deliverances of an ultimate natural
science, sellers can say he's bridging
the gulf between appearances and things
in themselves.
As I indicated when I introduced the
topic, I don't think that seller's
theoretic scientific realism and his
onlogical nominalism contradict one
another. I think he envisages three
levels. First, the manifest image
articulating how things appear to us in
the life world of observation.
Second, the scientific image which is
authoritative in the dimension of
describing and explaining those
appearances.
And third, a deeper ontological level of
a fundamentally non-conceptual reality
of which the scientific image is in
another sense a mere conceptual
appearance.
The relation between the first two is
one of explanatory priority. The world
as specified by the best scientific
theoretical vocabularies counts as the
reality of which the world as specified
in the vocabularies of observational
common sense is an appearance in that
the proper empirical explanation of the
facts of the common sense world of
observables is to be found in facts
articulated by theoretical scientific
concepts.
In this sense, water is the appearance
of H2O and lightning is the appearance
of atmospheric electron flows.
What then is the further sense in which
the reality underlying the appearance in
this sense in question that is the world
of scientific facts, property and
relations is supposed to be a
nominalistic world of mere particulars.
I think the key is to be found in the
contrast sellers draws. For instance, in
the passage passage I quoted just above
between an extringistic domain and the
linguistic and conceptual order.
Of course, drawing such a distinction is
of the essence of the conceptual
phenomenalism of the orthodox contean
sort. I think Sers is operationalizing
that distinction by considering a
counterfactual question.
What things would there be in a
non-llinguistic so non-conceptual world
in the sense of a world in which there
are no language users?
In effect, as I understand him, Sellers
is inviting us to distinguish between
the world in a broad sense in which
there are discursive practices and
practitioners and the world in a narrow
sense in which there are not and never
have been and never will be. That's a
counterfactual world. The thought
experiment is to consider what features
of the world are mind or language
independent in the sense that their
existence does not subjunctively
presuppose the existence of concept
users.
This is recognizably a version of the
question raised by const distinction
between things as they are in themselves
and things as they are for us. in
themselves means apart from
independently of bracketing our
representational activity. As there
would be no prices in a world without
practices of commodity exchange, there
would be no assertings or inferrings in
a world without discursive practices.
Although such things and the concepts
they involve are to be found in the
world in the broader sense that includes
our activities.
Now let me see.
I hope you can see this diagram. The
distinction between the world in the
narrow language independent sense and in
the broad sense that includes discursive
practices is an intelligible and
interesting one to investigate. Though,
as we'll see, it's a more delicate
matter to draw carefully than might
initially appear. In any case,
considering the counterfactuals that
exclude concept applying
representational activity is clearly
addressing quite a different question
than asking about the explanatory
priority of scientific theoretical
concepts over the observables of common
sense.
In effect, in Kant's terms, Seller's
scientific realism asserts the empirical
reality of the theoretical deliverances
of natural science as underlying and
explaining the appearances of the
manifest image. While Sers's onlogical
nominalism asserts the transcendental
ideality of both sorts of empirical,
conceptually articulated appearances,
both the common sense and the
theoretical scientific.
As with Kant, the transcendental
question is what features represented
reality should be taken to have
independently of the concept applying
activities of using representings in
coping with empirical reality
discursively or linguistically.
There's a large-scale structural analogy
between the scientific realism that
sellers's version of empirical
conceptual realism and the onlogical
nominalism that is sellers's version of
transcendental idealism as conceptual
phenomenalism.
Just as the first divides into a
negative and a positive part, namely the
denial of instrumentalism about
theoretical objects and the explanatory
privileging of the deliverances of
scientific theory over observations in
the vocabulary of common sense. So too,
sellers's onlogical nominalism comprises
a negative and a positive part. The
first is the denial that predicates and
declarative sentences refer to or even
in sellers's broad broader usage signify
or represent items in the
non-llinguistic world and a distinctive
kind of argument for that denial.
The second is a constructive proposal
for how to understand the representation
of a world of particulars by
constellations of genuine singular
terms. The argument for the negative
thesis here takes the form of an
analysis of expressions such as
triangularity and the fact that snow is
white as essentially metal linguistic as
representing features of other
representings rather than worldly
representing represented.
At the center of this analysis is
seller's meta metal linguistic
terminological innovation of dotqued
expressions.
I'll be focusing on this limb of
Seller's finely articulated vision. The
core of the constructive suggestion for
how to understand prospicuously
nominalistic representations of a world
consisting entirely of objects is Sers's
description of a kind of vocabulary in
which the declarative sentences
expressing claimables consist entirely
of constellations of names, what he
calls jumboles. I won't be discussing
this important aspect of sellers's
enterprise in this talk.
My interest here is with the argument
for the negative part of sellers's
ontological nominalism.
He argues that in a world without
linguistic practice practices there
would be no properties, attributes or
universals or facts by arguing that the
concepts property and fact are
metalinguistic.
If and in so far as they are, he thinks
it follows that in a world without
object languages, there would be nothing
for these essentially metal linguistic
concepts to apply to. So no properties,
what he calls attributes or facts and
hence no conceptual structure.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> I think the reason Sers converted
already in 1947 to what he called the
new way of words, a way of doing
philosophy that he'd previously
resisted, was his appreciation of
Carnap's analysis of claims about
abstract objects as covertly
metalinguistic, in Carnap's terms, quasi
syntactic.
Carnap reads statements such as
triangularity is a property as
misleading expressions in the material
mode of what's more prospicuously
expressed in the formal mode by such
metallinguistic sentences as is
triangular is a one place monatic
predicate
when he when sellers addresses the topic
explicitly a little over a decade later
in three lengthy papers that constitute
perhaps his most careful and sustained
treatment of any philosophical issue.
Sellers identifies two fundamental
difficulties with Carnap's proposal
which he proposes to adopt.
First, the claim that triangularity is a
property does not mention nor apparently
say anything directly about linguistic
expressions as the metal linguistic
paraphrase does. Should the German
translation diacite is shaft be
understood as covertly referring to the
English predicate is triangular or to
the German predicate is triic. And why
one rather than the other? Second,
Carnap's account does not really
eliminate properties. It just trades
non-llinguistic universals like property
for linguistic ones like monatic
predicate. that might well represent
analytic progress, but it does not
constitute a satisfactory nominalistic
explaining away of platonist platonistic
universals in general.
Sellers develops Carnep's account so as
to retain its guiding insight into the
covertly metal linguistic character of
abstract object talk while addressing
these two shortcomings.
He does that in each case by introducing
a new way of constructing expressions
into the regimented meta vocabulary into
which he proposes to translate claims
about universals including propositions
namely dot quotation.
The sentence triangularity is a property
is now to be understood as meaning dot
is triangulars are monatic predicates.
The two principal ways expressions
formed by dotquoting object language
locations differ from standard quotation
are designed to respond to the two
objections to Carnap's initial account.
These are first that the quoted
expressions from the base vocabulary
here the occurrence of the English
language expression triangular are to be
understood not as quote names of that
expression but according to what he
calls the illustrating sign principle.
Second, the metalinguistic expressions
that result from dotquoting ordinary
language words and phrases are to be
understood not as expressing universals
or properties characterizing these words
and phrases, but as distributive
singular terms, DSTs.
What are these features? What are these
features of dot quotation that
distinguish it from forming
metalinguistic names of object language
expressions and how do they resolve the
inadequacies sellers identified in
carnap's analysis?
The first idea that is triangular is
triic
triangular and corresponding expressions
in other natural languages are allis
triangulars in virtue of playing
corresponding conceptual roles in their
home languages.
As an inferentialist, Sers envisages
global isomorphisms, however rough
around the edges, between the material
implication relations among sentences of
those different languages.
Dot quoted expressions assimilate
expressions of different languages
accordingly as they stand in the same
relations of implication and
incompatibility.
The set of expressions in various
languages that are all dot is
triangulars is an equivalence class
relative to that isomeorphism of
inferential roles.
The illustrating sign design principle
is the idea that one can pick out any
such equivalence class by enclosing any
of its individual members in dot quotes.
Since it doesn't matter which
representative of the equivalence class
plays this role, they'll all determine
the same set of expressions playing the
role they share. The expressions dot is
triangular and dot is triic can be used
interchangeably.
So one is entitled but not obliged to
translate the dotqued expressions when
translating the sentences in which it
occurs.
It's accordingly tempting and many
commentators have succumbed to this
temptation to think of dotqued
expressions as names not now of
expressions of particular languages as
in carnapian syntactic metal languages
but of the conceptual roles that are
shared by expressions in different
languages construed as inferential
functional equivalence classes of such
expressions.
After all, the sign design types that
are dot is triangulars form just such an
equivalence class. However, any such
reading would fall a foul of the second
difficulty seller's diagnosis with
Carnap's original account. In the
context of a nominalistic metaphysical
program, equivalence classes of
linguistic expressions are still
objectionable abstract universals,
albeit now con confined to the
linguistic sphere.
Avoiding that odious consequence is the
point of the second innovative feature
of Solarian dot quotes. Construing
dotqued expressions as metalinguistic
distributive singular terms rather than
as names of functional kinds of
linguistic expressions.
Seller's solution in his own words quote
requires us to hold that not all ones
over and against many are universals.
for instance, qualities, relations,
sorts, kinds, or classes, and
consequently to conclude that the
problem of the one and the many is in
fact broader than the problem of
universals."
End of the quote. His example of a one
and many that is not a universal in his
sense is what's referred to by the
expression the pawn.
His analysis will be that in that that
expression is a distributive singular
term. In effect, he shows us how such
terms are used
and wants that pragmatic account to do
the work that was supposed to be done by
semantic talk of what they refer to,
namely the thought would be universals.
Another quote, to refer to such a one,
we need a singular term other than the
singular terms by which we refer to
individual pawns and yet which does not
refer to a universal of which there are
instances. End of the quote. Pawn is a
common noun, but the pawn, as in in
chess, the pawn can only move forward,
is not. It's a singular term, not a
general sortal term, but it's a singular
term of a special kind, a distributive
singular term, DST. As such, it's a way
of referring to each pawn and only
thereby indirectly to all pawns.
Sellers's nominalistic strategy is to
understand DSTs such as the lion in
sentences such as the lion is Tory as
paraphrase paraphrasable with plurals
such as lions in the inferentially
equivalent sentence lions are Tory
long quote from sellers. If therefore we
can understand the relation of the lion
one to lions many without construing the
lion as a universal of which lions are
instances. And if the looked for a
singular term pertaining to pawns can be
construed by analogy with the lion
indeed as the pawn then we would be in a
position to understand how the pawn
could be a one as against a many without
being a universal of which pawns are
instances.
This in turn would enable a distinction
between a generic sense of abstract
entity in which the lion and the pawn as
well as triangularity construed as the
dot triangular and that 2 + 2 equals 4
construed as the dot 2 plus 2 equals 4
would be abstract entities as being ones
over against many. And a narrower sense
of abstract entity in which qualities,
relations, sorts, classes and
propositions and the like are abstract
entities. But of these only a proper
subset universals but not propositions
for example would be ones as over and
against instances or members. This
subset would include the kind lion and
the class of pawns which must not be con
confused with the lion and the pawn as
construed above. End of that long quote.
25 years later, the logician George
Bulos would demonstrate in full
technical detail that allowing plurals
such as pawns and lions, which Sellers
regards as giving the meaning of
statements involving the distributive
singular terms the pawn and the lion,
provides the full expressive power of
manatic second order logic, which
quantifies over universals in the sense
of properties and sets and claims for it
the same nominalistic advantages that
sellers invokes here.
Since Carnap showed to seller
satisfaction that talk of abstracta
could adequately be translated into talk
of specifically metal linguistic kinds.
It's metal linguistic distributive
singular terms that matter for sellers's
version of nominalism.
These are formed
from dotqued expressions.
So the dot is triangular is a metal
linguistic distributive singular term.
It can be used to functionally classify
other expression types by saying such
such things as is triic is a dot is
triangular.
This puts us at long last in a position
to understand the basic argument for
sellers onlogical nominalism.
When this sophisticated version of
Carnap's metal linguistic account is
combined with the way sellers
distinguishes between the world in the
wide sense and the world in the narrow
sense, it yields a new conclusion.
abstract to exist only in the world in
the wide sense distinguished by
including the products of discursive
activity. Four, the thought is property
and proposition expressions refer
distributively to linguistic expressions
ultimately signes design tokenings in
the world in the narrow sense. There are
no such things. So properties and
propositions do not refer in the now
nominalistically acceptable sense to
anything in the world in the narrow
sense. What is in the first instance
conceptually articulated is facts, true
propositions in the sense of sayables
about what properties objects have and
what relations they stand in to one
another. The particulars referred to by
the singular terms merely referred to.
So the argument goes conceptual
articulation is ultimately a
metalinguistic affair and is not to be
found in the world in the narrow sense.
By definition, the world in the narrow
sense includes only non-llinguistic
items. So the world in the narrow sense
of what could still exist in a world
without language use and so conceptual
activity paradigmatically the use of
sentences to express judgments cannot
contain anything referred to by metal
linguistic DSTs
on sellers's carnapping account. Then
there cannot be universals, properties
or relations and propositions or facts
in the world construed narrowly.
Discursive practices are needed to
confer conceptual content on the
collection of particulars that for
sellers are what really exists for us to
talk and think about. Apart from such
practices, the world as it is in itself
in that sense lacks conceptual
structure.
This is the conceptual phenomenalism
that puts sellers's account in a box
with const transcendental idealism.
So let me conclude. My principal aim has
been to explore how some of the
different parts of seller's wide-ranging
philosophical system hang together. I
focused on his astonishing articulation
and defense of a wholly original metal
linguistic form of contean conceptual
phenomenalism after the linguistic turn
epitomized in the thought that grasp of
a concept is always mastery of the use
of a linguistic expression.
Paradigmatically the predicates that
articulate the role sentences play as
reasons for and against other sentences.
In effect, in contient terms, Seller's
scientific realism asserts the empirical
reality of the theoretical deliverances
of natural science as underlying and
explaining the appearances of the
manifest image. While Sers's onlogical
nominalism asserts the transcendental
ideality of both sorts of empirical,
conceptually articulated appearances,
both common sense and theoretical
scientific.
These correspond to two different senses
of real as opposed to apparent.
Empirical reality is the real is what
can be specified in the vocabulary of a
projected ultimate natural science. The
vocabulary of the scientific image which
the scientia menurus says is privileged
in specifying what's described and
explained by contrast to what can be
specified in the ordinary language of
the manifest image. And on the other
hand, transcendental reality is the real
as what's independent of mind or
language. The real as what
counterfactually would still exist even
if there had never been and never would
be participants in linguistic practices.
The first I'm suggesting is the sense in
which acceleration an essentially
relational property is empirically real.
And the second is the sense in which
acceleration is transcendentally ideal
but not transcendentally real. Solarsian
sign designs, marks and noises that play
distinctive linguistic roles are
empirically real and can stand in
empirical picturing relations to other
empirical real things, but they're not
transcendentally real in so far as the
practices of producing them are among
what is definitionally excluded from the
world in the narrow sense.
So a particular concern has been to show
how Sellers can coherently maintain his
version of transcendental idealism
against the background of the robust
naturalism of his scientific realism at
the level of empirical knowledge.
I argued that the key lies in a region
of Sers's thought that might initially
seem to be far removed from both of
these issues. His deflationary
metalinguistic nominalist analysis of
universal properties and propositions.
His metal linguistic account of what
we're doing when we talk about such
things rules out their inclusion among
features of the world that it would
still have in the absence of all
discursive activity.
I've expressed skepticism about the
ultimate intelligibility of sellers's
ontologically nominalist world of
particular shorn of facts about them.
It's a point of contention between me
and Ryan Simelli.
But regardless of its attractiveness or
even viability, looking at how Sellers
justifies his restriction of conceptual
structure to the products of language
users discursive practices both clearly
displays central elements of his deep
affinities with Kant and strikingly
illustrates the systematic unity of his
own thought. That is the feature that
makes each thesis or meaty passage drawn
from sellers's corpus resemble as he
himself once said Tennyson's flower in
the crannied wall that reflects and
implicitly contains the whole
philosophical world it inhabits. The
tennyson is flower in the crannied wall.
I pluck you out of the crannies. I hold
you here. Root and all in my hand little
flower. But if I could understand what
you are, root and all and all in all, I
should know what God and man is,
or at least how, according to Sellers,
things in the widest possible sense of
the term hang together in the widest
possible sense of the term. Thank you
for your attention.
And I should say I hope you folks could
hear me because I lost the visual image.
>> Okay.
Can I
Can you hear me, Bob?
>> I I can hear you but I can't see.
>> Cannot see us.
Still not
problem.
>> We can see you.
>> Well, I'm glad of that, but for the last
for the last three minutes or so, I
haven't been able to uh see you folks.
Uh, now I'm getting a an image.
>> Okay. Yeah.
Yeah.
But thank you very much, Bob. It's
wonderful. Also, it's amazing. Just just
one hour.
It's okay.
>> Yes.
>> Now it's okay.
>> Yes. Now, now you're
>> okay. Yeah.
>> Good. Yes.
>> Okay. So, now let's move to the question
and answer section. And uh if you any
question just please yeah raise your
hand.
Okay.
Hey Bob, can you hear me?
>> Yes, I can.
>> Oh, great. So, thanks for the lecture.
I have a question pertaining to your use
of equivalent classes
and this comes out of a reading of your
book with Ulf that we went through just
now with Preston and others.
And I wondered if you could put uh the
notion of an equivalence class
in connection with the talk of virtual
classes that Cedus dwells on towards the
closing of science and metaphysics 5
because that seems to be the point where
his take on scientific realism comes to
a moment. moment where he would need
that vocabulary of being able to specify
in different meta vocabularies. What is
implied by accepting that we can be
committed to functional equivalence
classes themselves being dot codable
and I wondered how you can make sense of
that.
>> Yeah. Well,
not to try and go into too much detail
about it. I think that u sellers, you
know, was a nominalist in the starting
in the 50s the same way Quin and Goodman
was and maybe u coming out of the same
environment that they did. Uh and that
his resolution uh for how to avoid uh
the onlogical proflegacy of classical
set theory was the same. It was to go
myological. uh it was it was to use part
whole relations instead.
>> Uh when when uh he's understanding the
lion is Tony, he's thinking of that as
uh a matter of uh referring to the
individual u lions and referring to
individual Tawny things and saying one
of them is part uh of the other. uh in
in his uh final iteration of his system
that takes a pro the form of a process
ontology that processes can be parts uh
of other processes. And his project is
to reconstruct everything that he needs
to say about things like the equivalence
classes of sign designs that are brought
together uh and referred to by
distributive singular terms in the form
of dot quotes uh to to say everything he
needs to say about those uh equivalence
classes in a broadly myological
vocabulary. Now, myriology had not been
as fully developed uh as it is now. Uh
the work on plurals uh uh uh that I
referred to Abulos hadn't been done. Uh
there was just a lot of machinery that
he didn't have access to that a
contemporary
uh defender of his position could appeal
to. Uh, as I mentioned briefly at the
end, I still don't think the result is
ultimately intelligible. This is not a
part of sellers that that I u endorse or
try and do anything with. uh but here I
was trying to reconstruct uh the role
that it plays uh in his world and maybe
to put in play uh in contemporary
discussions his form of nominalism his
metal linguistic nominalism which I
think is quite different from what other
analytic metaphysicians are considering.
>> Yeah. Great.
just speaking to this. Can you hear me?
Okay.
>> Yes.
>> Or just this one. Okay. Hi, thank you so
much for the talk. Um I'm just wondering
about uh how much distance you actually
see between sellers and can't on some of
this. So there's this there's this
notion from the modern tradition of a
substantiated phenomenon. So this is a
notion that Kant uses the example of
rainbows to discuss where a rainbow is
something that you encounter in the
empirical world but it's not really an
appearance. It's sort of an appearance
of an appearance or something along
those lines where like you can you can
understand what a rainbow is. You can
treat it as an object, but ultimately
you're going to interpret it, explain it
or however in terms of something sort of
prior but still at the level of the
empirical world. And when I was hearing
your description of sellers, it sort of
sounded like what somebody K would say
is the view that the objects of
perceptual experience are substantiated
phenomena. that the objects of
scientific inquiry are appearances in
the Kantian sense. Then there's the
things themselves sort of beyond that
world. And I guess like questions aside
about what what Kant actually actually
thinks. Like that strikes me as like
there doesn't seem to me to be that that
much of a distance there between the the
Kantian view itself and what we're
getting here from Sal.
>> Okay, good. I mean, Kant does discuss
the notion of of well-founded phenomena.
That's a Linian notion and the the
rainbow example indeed is is one of
Linets's favorites. uh so K cut his cut
his teeth on that and it's important to
cont to distinguish himself from uh that
Linetsian view even though he takes over
a lot uh uh uh a lot of claims in the
vicinity from Linets and I I think the
big difference is uh K seeing the
distinction between what's in conceptual
form and what's not uh which was
something that u he he takes it that
that even liets did not uh understand in
thinking of uh part of uh perceptions as
uh having perceptual species and
conceptual species for for Kant the
difference is we've got phenomena that
are conceptually articulated that can
provide reasons uh um uh one for another
reasons for and against how could we
understand them as being founded in
something that wasn't in conceptual
shape. Uh that that's what he boggles
at. Uh understanding the conceptual as
the product of our activities as a
matter of our making judgments following
rules. Uh and that's where reasons come
in. But he sees that on the side of the
representings.
uh there's then this gulf uh how are we
to understand what's represented what's
founding these phenomena uh the reality
behind them as being in conceptual shape
uh and he says well in one sense uh they
are
empirical nature is uh for him in
conceptual shape but uh a as uh for
sellers it is uh But that just shows
that it's only transcendentally
ideal. Uh because what's
transcendentally real cannot be
made sense of as being in conceptual
shape if you have the broadly pragmatic
account of the origin of conceptual
articulation that Kant has. That
conceptual articulation comes from our
synthetic activity, our uh unifying
what can then be seen to be
representings
uh into something having the
transcendental unity characteristic of a
perception that's articulated by what's
a reason for and what's a reason
against. So the big difference between
the linenian notion of wellfounded
phenomena and Kant's situation is Kant
makes a sharp distinction that that
livets didn't between the conceptual and
the non-conceptual.
>> Hi Bob.
>> Hi Jim.
Um this is I haven't gone through this
sort of thing a lot previously so it's
new to me incredibly rich way of
interpreting sellers. So what I'm trying
to figure out is the ontological
nominalism
um and whether you think sellers is
envisioning in the ideal scientific
image
uh the onlogically nominalist
represented like like you say a world
that could exist without language users
but he's envisioning
language users like us representing that
world
in the ideal scientific image there will
be conceptual representers
is how I read him
which is attention because if the world
of conceptual representers leads to
conceptual phenomenalism
um it's it's difficult to imagine how
representers like us
could represent or picture this
ontologically nominalist world.
>> Well, I mean I think I think jumbles is
his
>> right. Exactly.
answer to say how we could. But I take
it
>> but I take it he does not think that the
ultimate science will be expressed in
jumbles.
Philosophers are going to have to think
about u the jumbles represent the the
onlogically nominalist uh careful
representation of those uh of those
things and and that's the level at which
the properties and propositions and
facts drop out.
But isn't it the case suppose one held
the view that it's our discursive
practices that generate and sustain the
sort of pictures. It's our nominal
normgoverned conceptual practices on
sellers view that generate
the cat is on the mat uh pictures of
reality that can be interpreted in terms
of jumboes and so on. So that already in
the it's you already have the man the
ontological
uh nominalist picture in a story about
how conceptual representers generate how
language sort of unintentionally as it
were. uh it's because of the rules of
the game for cat and for Matt and is on
that we generate structures that are
physically isomorphic to reality and
science just doesn't better and better
of job of that. So the ideal image is
one with conceptual reners representers
but that nominal nominalistically
represent that world. Well, I mean I I
think that's right except for the very
last thing uh the very last phrase. Uh
the scientific world I is through and
through conceptual and it's produced by
uh our conceptual activity and both
dimensions of it are both the conceptual
uh dimension and the non-conceptual
picturing which as you say is a matter
of factual non-reason uh relation
instituted by the regularities
u uh consequent on are following the
norms and engaging in the practices we
do. So, uh none of that would be there
in in a world without linguistic
practices there. There would not be
picturing relations in that world and
the sort of A4 the scientific world
picture would not be uh picturing a
reality uh in that in the world in the
narrow sense. There's no scientists.
There's no scientific world picture.
None of that's there. Uh in the world in
the narrow sense, it's just one thing
after another. Um
that's the
nonconceptual
um
>> reality. That's what's transcendentally
real. And I say I have serious
difficulties wrapping my mind around
that picture. I don't understand that
picture of the world. I cannot see that
as uh intelligible and that's a a
problem with my reading of him. On the
other hand, he just is a nominalist. And
the question is whether you can uh
ultimately make sense of that. But the
whole of the scientific enterprise, the
whole of uh scientific realism is on the
merely transcendentally ideal side. The
conceptual realism is transcendentally
ideal. What what's real is the
conceptual phenomenalism, our conceptual
representings of a nonconceptual world
with this gulf between them.
>> Okay. I guess that there is a way of
reading sellers where it's the
conceptual practices
that generate the pictures
in every image. So that language forms
an isomorphic structure that represents
a nominalistic reality.
They don't and therefore
>> but they don't represent it as a
nominalistic reality. They represent it
as having facts and properties and
accelerations and so on in it. uh and
yeah there is the um
matterof factactual non-conceptual
picturing relation but even that would
not exist in the world in the in the
narrow sense uh if there's nobody doing
science there's no picturing of the
world by
>> I agree with that okay thanks well
thanks
>> very later we still have other
So
the time
Oh, very sorry.
And so
thank you very much, Bob.
Well,