Overview
People
Learn more
Essays
Briefs
Bare minima
Research
Papers
Presentations
Problems
Book
Help
Foundation
Donate
Assumptions of Physics
A research program led by Christine Aidala
and Gabriele Carcassi
at the University of Michigan
What do the basic laws of physics describe? Why
is the state of a classical particle identified by position and momentum (i.e. a point
on a cotangent bundle) while the state of a quantum system is identified by a
wave function (i.e. a vector in a Hilbert space)? Could we have had different laws?
Our research program aims to identify a handful of physical principles and assumptions
from which the basic laws can be rigorously derived.
We believe this approach allows us to answer the
above questions as it forces us to:
Clarify our assumptions. As we are forced to formalize and make explicit our starting points,
we understand under which conditions each physical theory is valid. We also have a better
idea of when and how they fail, possibly giving new insights that may lead to new physics.
Put physics back at the center of the discussion. By starting from physical ideas we put physics
back at the center of the discussion, instead of relegating it to a mere after-the-fact interpretation
as it is currently done in most modern scientific theories. Many results can be directly understood
in terms of the assumptions, fostering a better intuition for the mathematical results.
Give science sturdier mathematical grounds. As each mathematical symbol is given a precise physical meaning,
our formal framework maps one-to-one to our physical understanding.
This means we automatically leave out any unphysical mathematical artifact.
Foster connections between different fields of knowledge. We have found recurring core concepts
between different fields of science, math, philosophy and engineering. In retrospect, this is not surprising: nature
is one and does not care about such divisions, and therefore truly fundamental concepts must span freely across
different areas.
Provides a way to pose deep questions. Once we have formalized what we mean by scientific theory and
identified what conditions are required to rederive the basic laws, we can try to understand whether those
requirements are statements about the world around us or are statements about what is needed to do science.
Assumptions of Physics
info@assumptionsofphysics.org