Skip to main content
Skip to secondary navigation
Stanford University (link is external)
Stanford Digital Repository services
Stanford Digital Repository Services
Search this site
Submit Search
Menu
Home
What's New
Documentation
Understanding the SDR Terms of Deposit
Copyrights, licenses, and access restrictions
License options
Preparing content for deposit
PURLs and DOIs
Versioning
Start a capstone collection
Collection management
SDR review workflow
Articles workflow
GitHub workflow
SDR metrics
Related works
Data management plans
Author & contributor roles
People
About
Stanford Digital Repository services
Promote and protect your scholarship
Stanford Digital Repository (SDR)
The Stanford Digital Repository supports management of scholarly information resources of enduring value to Stanford University.
Faculty, students, and researchers use SDR services to preserve and make publicly available the products of their work. Scholars around the world use content in the SDR in their research.
Main content start
Choose how to get started
Do-It-Yourself
Are you a Stanford faculty, staff, or student and have one or just a few items to deposit? Use our self-service web application and you'll be done in a jiffy.
Get started
Start a project with us
Have more than a handful of items or specific needs? Contact us to discuss a larger project with library staff.
Contact us
Who can deposit?
Members of the Stanford community:
Students
Faculty
Postdocs
Staff
What can I deposit?
Scholarly materials for sharing broadly:
Research data in any format, including data for publications
Articles, working papers, preprints, technical reports, etc.
Student works, such as honors theses, capstones, and course research projects
Artistic works
Conference materials, like slides and posters
Archival documents, recordings, oral histories, etc.
The SDR is not designed as working space or backup storage.
When should I deposit?
Deposit your works:
When complete and ready to share
To accompany an article at the time of publication
At grant end to fulfill funder sharing requirements
Before you move on from Stanford
SDR Features
The benefits of this service distinguish the SDR from other content storage or management options on campus: deposited content is preserved in a robust, reliable, and secure environment for access by scholars today and for generations to come.
Persistent Access
Every deposit is accessible at a persistent URL (PURL) maintained by Stanford Libraries. Ideal for citations.
Secure, archival storage
Content of scholarly value requires more than standard file back-up. The SDR storage system is designed to protect against data corruption, loss, or inadvertent change.
DOI
Choose to get a DOI for your PURL. They are a powerful combination to make your work more discoverable and reliably accessible. Find out more about DOI services.
Usage metrics
Real-time tracking of how many times your SDR item has been viewed or downloaded always you to better understand the impact of your shared works.
Altmetric
SDR content with a DOI is tracked by Altmetric, which looks for online attention to the work in traditional and social media, blogs, and patents, policy documents, and more.
ORCID iDs
Choose to enter your ORCID iD along with your deposit to ensure your work is reliably attributed to you. ORCID iDs are displayed next to author and contributor names, and link directly to their ORCID records.
ORCID updates
Include ORCID iDs for Stanford authors and we'll automatically push the work to their ORCID records when authors have given us permission to do so.
License selection
Choose from a variety of options, and let those who access your work know how they can use it.
Access controls
For those cases when open access to the public is not suitable, access to your work can be restricted to Stanford users.
Any file type
There are no restrictions on the format or type of file that can be deposited to the SDR.
SearchWorks catalog
Your work is discoverable in the library catalog, where it is picked up by search engines like Google for users around the globe.
Embeddable viewer
The SDR content viewer is easily embeddable, giving you the flexibility to feature and present your SDR deposit in other web pages.
Additional features of self-deposit
Article workflow
Use the DOI for your published article to quickly deposit an open access copy in the SDR.
Articles workflow
GitHub workflow
Automatically deposit new releases of a GitHub repository.
GitHub workflow
Unlimited self-deposits at no charge
Fees may apply for large volumes or bulk deposits.
Embargo
Delay the release of your deposit for any time up to 3 years from the date of deposit.
Easy transfer with Globus
Easily transfer large files on Oak, Sherlock, OneDrive, or Stanford's Google Drive to the SDR using Globus.
Versioning
Make changes to your work after depositing. File changes will automatically create a new public version of the work to support transparency and reproducibility. Depositors have the option to create new public versions for non-file changes as well. All versions are stored in our preservation system.
PURL and DOI reservation
Get the links first so you can include them in a submitted manuscript, then complete the deposit when you are ready.
Review workflow
When it is important to manually check and approve works submitted by others before they are fully deposited into your repository collection, use the review workflow.
Custom use statement
When a standard license or use statement doesn't meet your needs, a custom use statement can be included with your deposit.
Collections
Create a dedicated repository collection where you can add and manage multiple deposits; invite Stanford collaborators to contribute their work too. Option to configure settings for licenses, embargos, DOIs, and access restrictions in the collection.
Explore the SDR
Search the SDR
Content in the SDR can be found via the libraries' catalog SearchWorks.
Start here
Online exhibits
Digital showcases for research and teaching.
Explore online exhibits
Digital collections
Archives, faculty papers, artworks, historic maps, oral histories, medieval manuscripts -- and so much more! -- in the SDR.
Explore digital collections
Keep up with the SDR
Our newsletter is pithy -- a quick read 3x per year -- with the latest on open access, open data, student works, and SDR's ongoing development.
Sign up for SDR News
Web Accessibility
Stanford University is committed to providing an online environment that is accessible to everyone, including individuals with disabilities.
Having trouble accessing any of this content due to a disability? Learn more about accessibility at Stanford and report accessibility issues
Back to Top
Stanford Digital Repository Services
Stanford Digital Repository Services
Web Login
Address
Stanford Libraries
557 Escondido Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
United States
Contact us
SDR Terms of Deposit
Self-deposit web app
Stanford
University (link is external)
Stanford Home (link is external)
Maps & Directions (link is external)
Search Stanford (link is external)
Emergency Info (link is external)
Terms of Use (link is external)
Privacy (link is external)
Copyright (link is external)
Trademarks (link is external)
Non-Discrimination (link is external)
Accessibility (link is external)
© Stanford University.
Stanford, California 94305.