Hello YouTube. In this video, we're
going to look at the question, who is
the best philosopher ever? Surprisingly,
there's not a lot of published work that
tries to establish who is the best
philosopher ever. But the philosopher
Colin McInn has a blog post titled best
philosopher Ever that attempts to
address this obvious gap in the
literature. Colin Mcinn's conclusion is
that Colin McInn is the best philosopher
ever. And in this video, we're going to
examine his argument for that. Now, in
order to work out who is the best
philosopher, we need to have the right
criteria for assessment. What standards
should be used when judging the work of
a philosopher? McInn explicitly cites
four criteria, though actually he seems
to be committed to another one. I think
there's five actually in his in his
post. Um so first of all McInn begins by
claiming that contemporary philosophers
are in general superior to the
philosophers of the past and the reason
for this suggests the first criterion
which is expertise.
So um clearly one relevant factor in
assessing how good a philosopher is is
how much that philosopher knows about
philosophy. Um and I suppose fields
related to philosophy. Um so this is
expertise right like one criteria that
we're looking at here is expertise in
philosophy. But expertise in philosophy
is cumulative. It builds over time.
later philosophers will learn the
important ideas of other philosophers
and then be able to build on them. So
Bertrand Russell knew about Plato and he
knew you know a good amount of Plato's
arguments but Plato knew nothing of
Russell and this in itself is a reason
to think that Russell is a better
philosopher than Plato. I mean today
even you know a good undergraduate will
be able to understand Plato's central
arguments. They'll be able to understand
various objections and defenses of those
arguments. Um so they they will know
actually a fair amount about past
philosophy. Um I mean the point is is
that we we stand on the shoulders of
giants but precisely for that reason we
are better than them at least with
respect to expertise at least with
respect to knowledge of philosophy. So
McInn concludes that we can fairly
swiftly dismiss the claim that any
philosopher long dead is going to have
to being the best. We should focus
basically on contemporary philosophers.
I mean, we should focus really on on the
sort of 20th century and and later
because these are the philosophers who
are going to have the most expertise.
So, this criterion, I imagine, is
immediately going to be controversial. I
mean, an obvious objection to this is
that it gets things the wrong way round.
What's more important than mere sort of
knowledge about philosophy is um impact
or influence, we might think. And this
is something that can only be judged in
retrospect. We know that Plato was a
great philosopher partly because we can
look back on the many debates that was
spawned by his work and we can see you
know we can see when we look back at the
history of philosophy which parts of
philosophy have stood the test of time
and which parts have been discarded and
we have no way to make that assessment
for contemporary philosophers. Right? We
can only judge impact in retrospect. So
if we take this as our criterion then
past philosophers are generally going to
be better. Now McInn is dismissive of
impact. Uh the problem McInn says is
that impact is uh fallible audience
conditioned and historically dependent.
Your impact will be highly dependent on
where you happen to have studied and
taught. So for instance WV Quin very
influential philosopher in at least
within 20th century philosophy. But
McInn says, well really, you know, like
why was Quin so influential? Why did he
have so much impact? It's mainly just
because he he taught at Harvard, right?
He happened to get into Harvard and he
taught so many people there who later
went on to, you know, do uh other
philosophical work inspired by him. But,
you know, it's like he just kind of got
lucky with where he was in in terms of
the institutions.
Um but you know I mean like look when it
comes to um you know when it comes to
philosophers over the centuries we we do
find big names come and go. Um for
example Thomas Aquinus he was once one
of the most influential names in uh
western philosophy. And I mean look we
still study his arguments. Um but I
think it relatively few modern
philosophers are still going to be
citing Aquinas as a significant
influence. I mean there's a period of
you know hundreds of years where Aquinus
had you know he was a hu he was like the
he was the guy you know I mean he sort
of combined Aristotilianism with
Christianity in a way that was extremely
influential. But the thing is is that
both of those things, you know, like
Aristotilianism and Christianity are no
longer they don't really have such a
grip on modern philosophy. Um, so it's
like too many of the underlying
assumptions that Aquinas was making have
now been rejected. Um, but yeah, I mean,
in any case, it's like, yeah, yeah,
there's not a lot of modern philosophers
who are going to cite Aquinus as a
significant influence. Um, at least
outside of philosophy of religion. I
mean within philosophy of religion maybe
it's different but you know you look at
sort of modern epistemology, modern
philosophy of science, modern meta
ethics etc. There's not a lot of people
there who really care that much about
Aquinas. Um now of course we shouldn't
really overstate this right? Uh many of
the big names of ancient Greek
philosophy have retained significant
influence for literally thousands of
years. Um, and we can find plenty of
arguments in the history of philosophy
that have remarkable staying power. So,
um, you know, Hume's problem of
induction, for instance, really does
challenge the foundations of science and
common sense reasoning about the world.
And this is a problem that people have
been thinking about since the time he
proposed it. and uh you know it's not
doesn't seem like there's going to be
any obvious consensus forming on that or
indeed that it's going to go away
anytime soon. Um I mean obviously
there's no guarantee that people are
going to continue to care about the
problem but the mere fact that it has
spawned such a massive literature over
hundreds of years well that looks like
it's in itself enough to judge that Hume
had a large impact. Um, [snorts]
so even if we were to come to a
consensus about how to solve the problem
or even if philosophical interests
changed in such a way that the problem
was no longer seen as relevant, we could
still look at its enormous impact over
the last few hundred years. We already
do that actually for someone like
Aquinus where even though he's not so
influential today, well, he clearly
stands as among the most influential
historically. So the fallibility and
audience dependence of influence, you
know, does that show that it's
irrelevant? Well, maybe not. Maybe it
just shows we have to consider a large
sweep of history. So we should be less
inclined to name any contemporary
philosopher as the best philosopher
ever. I think that though there is
another objection that we might have to
the influence criterion and it's this.
So we might say look obviously earlier
philosophers are going to be more
influential but that's just in virtue of
being earlier. I mean first because the
earlier you write the more time you have
until the present to influence people
like you know precisely because Plato
was writing thousands of years ago. He's
had thousands of years in which for his
influence to emerge and to play out.
um you know it's just like the the the
later you are in the timeline the less
opportunity there is for for influence.
The second thing is that by being
earlier you have the benefit of being
able to pick the lowhanging fruit as it
were the easier problems the most
obvious problems um and then in
proposing solutions to those problems
you can pick the easier solutions the
most obvious solutions. It was actually
relatively easy to come up with
genuinely novel ideas in the past just
because there were far fewer people
working in philosophy and there hadn't
been such a long recorded tradition of
people coming up with new philosophical
ideas. Um and then obviously if you do
come up with you know if you do pick the
lowhanging fruit then any you know later
writers on that topic are going to trace
their origins back to you. So while
Plato deserves a great deal of credit
for his insights, maybe we shouldn't
overstate the achievement, right? If
Plato had been alive today, he wouldn't
have achieved anywhere near as much.
Whereas there are many contemporary
philosophers who arguably could have
done what Plato did. There's less room
for novel ideas as time goes on. So you
get more credit for developing a novel
idea later in the timeline. to give
Plato significant credit just because he
came up with so many ideas that were
novel for his time is essentially just
to give him credit for being lucky
enough to be born early. Um so the
thought is this right um maybe we can't
just sort of rule out past philosophers
but you know maybe this is a sort of
compromise position between you know
Mcin's dismissal of past philosophers
and the the kind of influence criterion
dismissal of contemporary philosophers
where we say well when we judge when we
judge who's the best philosopher we sort
of give we give greater credit for kind
of good ideas that happen later in time.
Um maybe that that achieves something of
a balance there. But anyway, um this is
one of our criterians, right? So so
expertise does seem to count for
something. Um and maybe influence should
count for something, but um
here's a quick advert. So uh I do have a
Patreon, uh where there's a whole bunch
of bonus videos. And so if you uh if you
want to access some bonus content, then
you should sign up to the Patreon. Um,
obviously if you want to throw any money
my way, I really appreciate it. Uh, I
also think I still have some shirts
available. I made some shirts. Some of
them are kind of funny. I don't know.
Maybe you're interested in them, maybe
not. But, um, you know, they're there. I
mean, uh, anyway, let's get back to
McInn. Okay, so we're now going to turn
to the explicitly stated criteria that
McInn cites. And he gives he actually
gives four. So he says there's quality
of writing, breadth, quantity and
rightness. So let's start with quality
of writing.
Okay. So I guess this is a fairly
obvious one. Now with respect to quality
of writing, there are actually two
features that McInn takes to be
important. He says these are clarity and
literary style. Now in terms of clarity,
McInn claims in my opinion very
plausibly that his work is extremely
clear. Uh I think he's right about this.
I think whatever else you might whatever
other opinion you may have of Colin
Mcin's work, everything I've ever read
by him is very easy to understand. Uh I
never have any trouble understanding how
his arguments are supposed to work.
Obviously, philosophers deal with
difficult questions, but this does not
mean that the way we talk about those
questions should be difficult. Um,
indeed, precisely because of the
difficulty of the questions, we should
try to express our ideas in as clear a
way as possible. Um, so consider for
instance, McIn's book on logical
properties. This deals with a pretty
technical literature on topics like
identity, truth, possibility, but it
manages to be first of all remarkably
concise. Um, it's only about 120 pages.
I think it's a it's a very concise book.
Um, despite dealing with a whole bunch
of quite technical topics. Moreover, it
expresses its arguments in terms that
really would be accessible to, let's
say, the the educated lay person. you
know, um, uh, you don't really need any
deep background in, um, philosophy of
logic to understand what he's doing in
that book. Um, and and it does this
without any loss of important content.
You know, this isn't an introductory
book. It's it's a book that actually has
novel arguments. It's it's a fantastic
book, actually. Um, and so, you know,
this is this is just an example of how
McInn is a remarkably clear writer. Um,
some of Mcin's work genuinely does seem
to be among the clearest philosophy
you'll ever read. So, on this point, I
suppose I I think he's right. Um, now,
of course, there are plenty of
philosophers who write with clarity. Uh,
clarity seems to be favored within the
analytic tradition, or at least this is
what analytic philosophers often say
about themselves. Um, I would suggest
that analytic philosophy is uh often
does not have the clarity that it
pretends to have. um you only have to
take a look at how many classic
arguments in analytic philosophy are
wide open to interpretation. I mean look
at for instance Vickenstein's tractus
which is one of the foundational texts
of analytic philosophy. Um I mean what
the hell is he talking about for most of
that? It really isn't obvious at all. Um
or or take you know Quin's argument for
the indeterminacy of meaning or
sellers's argument against the myth of
the given or Davidson's argument against
conceptual schemes or Michael Dumit's
argument for justificationist semantics.
And I mean hey I mean I brought up
Vickenstein. Don't even get me started
on the private language argument. I mean
there's a whole bunch of there's a whole
bunch of stuff in analytic philosophy
that is just quite obscure and not easy
to understand at all. Um, so you know,
as much as analytic philosophers like to
claim that they favor clarity, I I'm
really not so sure. When you look at
some of the the big names in analytic
philosophy, um, often there is a lot of
difficulties of interpretation.
So, um, I mean, at least on this point,
you know, it it is, I would say, quite a
special feature of McInn's work that he
is so that he has such clarity. But of
course in any case clarity is not all
that matters. Philosophy is a literary
subject and as much is therefore much
about rhetoric as it is about logical
argument. So we also care about literary
style. Um the clarity of analytic
philosophy in so far as it has clarity
often sacrifices literary style. Um much
analytic philosophy is is rather dull to
be honest. uh it's it's hard to find a
philosopher who has both clarity and
literary style. McInn claims that his
own work exemplifies both. And he points
out, you know, he's he's an author um
not just of of academic philosophy, but
also novels, short stories, poetry.
McInn says, you know, look, he has
training in both science and literature,
so he can write in both ways. Um again,
I I think McInn is probably right about
this. whenever I, you know, when I've
read what I've read of McInn does seem
to have a, you know, he's pretty
stylish. He's a pretty good writer. Um,
so I think we can give him that. Okay. I
just want to point out a worry about
clarity here. So we're using as one of
the criterians clarity. Um
so
one concern about clarity is that
whether a text counts as clearly written
may be a matter of one's temperament and
one's training. Um analytic philosophers
often object that continental philosophy
is unclear. It's impenetrable. It's
obscure. But then you find, you know,
when you talk to people who are trained
in contemporary philosophy, they will
say, "No, you know, continental
philosophy actually is perfectly easy to
understand once you have the relevant
training." Um, you know, of course, you
can't just pick up a book on continental
philosophy and immediately understand it
without without that training. But then
the same is true for analytic
philosophy. um you know you can't just
go and like read Bertrand Russell's on
denoting without any kind of background
uh education in analytic philosophy and
what what you know that paper was about
and then understand it. You're not going
to understand it, right? Um and that's
actually the case for any specialist
subject. You can't just pick up a book
on physics or biology and then
understand it. You need to have some
training in the subject. Continental
philosophy can be understood perfectly
well with training. Um and the basic
ideas in continental philosophy can be
communicated um to uh to outsiders um in
introductory contexts. I mean just take
a 101 course or pick up an introductory
book. You can pick up an introductory
book on this stuff and it will and it
will I mean a good introductory book can
explain this stuff in ways that are
understandable. Um and so you know we
actually should take it that analytic
philosophy and continental philosophy
are really just on the same footing
here. And you know the the fact that
analytic philosophers find analytic
philosophy so easy to understand and
that it has such clarity. Well, yeah,
that's just cuz they were trained in
that subject. Um so clarity is largely
going to be a matter of your training.
There's another point here as well that
I I think um
you know
somebody from another tradition might
make. Okay. So
I can imagine you know a continental
philosopher looking at analytic
philosophy and saying
what what it is that analytic
philosophers call clarity is not
actually a good thing. Okay. the kind of
clarity that analytic philosophers
demand, that's
really more like just a kind of
abstraction that illegitimately strips
away the kind of social, historical, and
experiential context that gives
arguments their point and meaning. No,
like what you find in analytic
philosophy is analytic philosophers are
just focused on right well I'm just
going to state you know here's the
premises of the argument and here's the
conclusion and I can put this in like
formal terms you know I can formalize
this and I can just look at the
propositions that are expressed by these
statements and you know it doesn't
really matter where this argument came
from it doesn't matter who's giving the
argument it doesn't matter what the
social context is and actually if you
talk about that stuff you're kind of
missing the point the point is just to
evaluate the argument in itself. Um, and
then you know that's what proper
philosophy should do. I can imagine that
you know people from other traditions
might say no right what you are doing
here is you're just you're just
stripping away the kind of context that
actually gives that makes an argument
meaningful in the first place. When you
present an argument as some formal
structure that we can assess in itself
according to some universal rules of
reason um that's just incoherent right
um so analytic philosophers treat formal
logic as like the paradigm of clarity
and the style of formal logic is then
extended to argument in general but we
might say no formal logic is something
that's understood only in particular
contexts natural language arguments do
not literally instantiate logical forms
and the idea that you like extract the
logical form of an argument. Um, that's
that's just nonsense, right? The
analytic procedure is a procedure that
makes arguments meaningless. It strips
them of their meaning. So, what analytic
philosophers call clarity, that's just
really a matter of style, right? It's
like a performance. Clarity is style,
but without any substance. So, I mean,
the point is is look, there's going to
be plenty of debate about which
philosophers are really the best at
clarity. Uh, clarity seems like a
straightforward criterion, but uh it may
not have as much clarity as it initially
seems. Uh, that's the point. But anyway,
um, quality of writing that is that is
that is um, one of the criterions that
McGin suggests. And so, let's turn to
the next criterion. So, the next
criterion is breadth.
breadth. We should expect that the best
philosopher ever will be the philosopher
who has made contributions to a wide
variety of philosophical topics. Um, as
Wilfrid Cellers once said, philosophy is
the study of how things in the broadest
sense of the term hang together in the
broadest sense of the term. For many of
us, the appeal of philosophy lies in
being able to investigate the uh the big
questions of life. Questions at the
foundations of our beliefs and
practices. The ideal philosopher, the
best philosopher would have something to
say about all of these big questions.
Unfortunately,
um a lot of contemporary philosophy is
not really very broad. So you know I
said earlier McInn thinks that we can uh
on the basis of expertise we can
basically rule out all of the
philosophers of the past. You know we
should be looking really at contemporary
philosophy. But now we you know we we
see that actually we can we can rule out
a lot of contemporary philosophers
according to this breadth criterion
because most contemporary philosophy
doesn't have much breadth. Mo most
contemporary philosophers that is do not
have much breadth. Contemporary
philosophy has favored increasing
specialization.
So contemporary philosophers they tend
to work on a very narrow range of
topics. Like if you take if you take the
average contemporary philosopher they
tend to be kind of laser focused on a
very very narrow range of things.
You know they will specialize right? You
know they'll specialize in philosophy of
science and almost all their work will
be philosophy of science. And then not
just philosophy of science, but they
might well specialize in like some very
specific part of philosophy of science
like I don't know the scientific realism
debate. You know that that's what most
of their work is on is on the scientific
realism debate. So it's just one little
part of one area of philosophy. It's
highly specialized. Now even when
philosophers um have influence across
many domains often they do not
themselves actually work in those
domains. So consider for instance
Vickingstein.
Vickingsteinians
crop up everywhere but Vickinstein's own
writings were very limited in scope. I
mean Vickenstein was concerned with
language. Um he held that you know
misuse of language is the source of
almost all philosophical problems. Uh so
there is of course some sense in which
Vickenstein commented on philosophy as a
whole. But I I think first of all
there's a difference between you know
commenting on say metaphysics and
actually doing metaphysics you know I
mean it's it's one thing to sort of say
well look on the basis of my work in
philosophy of language I can just
dismiss basically all of metaphysics
that's I mean maybe in some sense you're
doing metaphysics but it's like there's
a difference between that and then
actually like writing a book on
metaphysics.
Um, and the other thing is that
the specific arguments that were given
by Vickenstein, they were all of a very
particular, very limited character. Um,
I mean, the arguments had broad
conclusions, but the arguments
themselves were kind of quite limited in
terms of the ideas that they were
actually dealing with. Um I mean I
suppose well I mean with Vickenstein
obviously you have early Vickenstein and
late Vickenstein and they were very
different but uh but still you know I
mean you can look at something like the
philosophical investigations which
arguably okay the philosophical
investigations has consequences for
philosophy as a whole but the actual you
know like the way that the philosophical
investigations argues for things is it's
it's a very specific type of argument
it's a very specific type of thing that
Vickenstein is doing in that book. Um,
and so, you know, it may well be
actually that the the sort of sweeping
conclusions combined with the narrow
style of argument, it it may well be
that that's precisely what allowed for a
tradition to flourish of philosophers
following up Vickenstein's work. I mean,
the same kind of thing characterizes a
lot of other philosophical traditions
actually like like logical positivism.
you know, the logical positivists, they
had very sweeping conclusions based on
quite narrow linguistic arguments.
Anyway, the point is the best
philosopher ever shouldn't be like this.
The best philosopher ever would, you
know, they they would be somebody who
writes on
on all these these domains, you know,
metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of
science, philosophy of logic, ethics,
aesthetics, metaphilosophy, and so on,
right? and and they should use arguments
that are unique to each of these areas
utilizing methods that are unique to
each of these areas. Um it shouldn't
just be that you know they have some
some general argument about say
philosophy of language that ends up
having consequences for all of these
areas. No, they should do like work
specific to all of these areas and
address these these questions in ways
that are kind of recognizable to each of
these domains. And this is demonstrably
true of Colin McInn. um at least so
Colin McKin says I mean and I mean
that's actually also fairly easy to see
when you just look at the work that he's
done he has done you I mean look he
obviously is famous for philosophy of
mind right that's where he's most well
known um but he has books on metaphysics
uh like heavyduty metaphysics uh he has
books on philosophy of logic as I said
he's got this book logical properties um
where he defends uh you know he
approaches this as a sort of philosopher
of logistic of logic would do and you
know present some unique ideas in
philosophy of logic using the kinds of
arguments that you know you would expect
of a philosopher of logic you know he's
talked about ethics about aesthetics
he's done work in all of these areas so
it is just true that Colin Mcinn has a
pretty good breadth of work
okay next quantity well this is a fairly
obvious criterion isn't it um quantity
the best philosopher ever would have
produced a a lot of stuff. So let's
suppose that there are two philosophers,
Sienna and Pearl, and they have produced
work of equal quality. Okay, the work is
exactly equal in terms of quality. But
Sienna has produced four times as much
as Pearl. She's just written four times
as much. Well, then we should say that
Sienna is better than Pearl. Um,
obviously we should prefer quality over
quantity.
You know quality is better than quantity
generally speaking. But if we keep the
quality fixed then the greater quantity
wins. So assuming equality of quality
assuming quality equality okay greater
quantity wins. Quantity breaks the tie
when there is equal quality.
Now McInn has
actually pretty demonstrabably produced
a fairly remarkable quantity of output.
Um, he has 20 books. That's a lot of
books for a philosopher. 20 books. He
has hundreds of articles and he's one of
the most prolific book reviewers. So, in
terms of sheer quantity, McInn has done
a lot of work.
All right. McInn's final criterion is
rightness.
Rightness. The best philosopher ever
would generally be correct. they would
generally have true beliefs.
Now the motivation for this criterion is
fairly obvious. The aim of philosophy
is to figure out the answers to
philosophical questions
in so far as those questions have
correct answers. We want to get those
answers or at least you know we want to
get the correct answer as to whether the
questions have correct answers. If they
do not have correct answers we want to
know that they do not and we want to
know why. Um we want to have true
beliefs. Philosophy aims at truth or
knowledge about philosophical topics. So
the best philosopher ever would be the
one who generally gets things right. Now
with this criterion we run into a
problem. What it is to believe a
proposition just is to take that
proposition to be true. So each
philosopher will view himself or herself
as doing the best in terms of rightness.
So I mean how do we even assess
rightness? Obviously, I'm going to take
it that my own views are right and I'm
going to judge things in light of that.
If this is a criterion of assessing
other philosophers, then we're going to
end up judging as best those with whom
we happen to agree. So, how can I how do
I reasonably assess rightness without
just judging as best those with whom I
happen to agree? Now, despite these
obvious difficulties with assessing
rightness, McInn thinks that there are
certain features of his philosophical
methodology that will uh tend to lend
themselves to avoiding error. So, McInn
says that he is probably, you know, we
we can kind of look at certain features
of his work and see he's probably more
likely to be right.
So, why think this? Well, first of all,
McInn says he is going to do better
because he doesn't tend to make
outlandish claims. So, he describes his
own work as being and I mean this is
just what he says boring and pedestrian.
Of course, as I said earlier, he thinks
that he writes with a certain kind of
literary flare, but the actual
conclusions that he comes to are he
thinks boring and pedestrian. He he
doesn't try to be interesting for its
own sake. He tries to be right. I mean,
some philosophers do try to be
interesting just for his own sake. Some
philosophers try to find, you know, bold
and crazy ideas, but if you do that,
you're probably less likely to be right.
McInn tries to be right. He tries to
come to the true conclusion. He doesn't
try to be interesting for its own sake.
Um, if you if you try to be interesting
for its own sake, that's going to reduce
your chances of getting things right.
But McInn doesn't do that. Second, McInn
cites the fact that he tends not to
receive much criticism, which indicates
that other philosophers do not see much
to criticize about his work. Um, now of
course one might wonder whether the
reason Mkin receives little criticism is
just that other philosophers don't care
about his work. Um, but actually that
doesn't seem to be true. I mean, you
know, like him or not, he is reasonably
wellknown in philosophy. Um, I mean,
McIn's work was um, presented to me in
undergraduate courses that I took. uh
like in philos I mean certainly in
philosophy of mind you know he came up
within the the sort of undergraduate
course so it's not like you know McInn
isn't and I mean he's somebody who has
um you know some
you know he he he he's he's well known
among people who who know about
philosophy you're going to have heard
about Colin McInn so I don't think it's
that he's just unknown right um so he
says you know look he okay he's a
reasonably well-known figure in
philosophy but he doesn't really receive
much criticism and what that indicates
is that other philosophers can't really
find much to criticize.
I think there's a fairly serious problem
with this part of McIn's argument, which
is actually he has received a hell of a
lot of pretty biferous criticism. Um,
some of the reviews of his books are
actually kind of infamous for their for
their venom. Um, so take for example um
Kerry McKenzie's review of his book
basic structures of reality. Um, so this
was Mcinn's book on philosophy of
physics. McKenzie accuses Mcinn of
forwarding theories that anybody
educated in physics would find
ridiculous. She claims that he has, I
quote, no grasp of the rudiments of the
subject. Um that he's ignorant of
physics and fails to engage with any of
the relevant philosophical literature.
So McKenzie summarizes, there is simply
no way to do justice to the
cringe-inducing nature of this text
without quoting it in its entirety. But
in a nutshell, basic structures of
reality is an impressively inept
contribution to philosophy of physics
and one exemplifying everything that can
possibly go wrong with metaphysics. It
is mind-numbingly repetitive, toe
curlingly predentious and amateur-ish in
the extreme regarding the incorporation
of physical fact. Um, I should note, by
the way, that this kind of that kind of
venom is not normal in uh a reviewer.
This isn't just so it's not just that
McGinness has received criticism like
he's received criticism that goes kind
of above and beyond the normal
philosophical criticism. Uh like anyway
along most philosophers are very polite
uh to each other. Anyway along similar
lines um reviewers of his book the
meaning of disgust accuse him of poor
argumentation and ignorance of the
contemporary empirical work. Um they say
that he doesn't even address the most
commonly accepted theory of disgust that
disgust evolved to motivate disease
avoidance. Uh Nenina Strowinger's review
says and I quote McMinn's view of
disgust is not merely ignorant or
unenlightening but obfiscatory. Baroque
eye-catching explanations are given
precedence over parimony evidence or
even common sense. Baroque eye-catching
explanations. It's almost as if maybe
McInn does try to be interesting for its
own sake. Um maybe. Um [snorts] anyway,
Strung continues. She says, "Miggin's
theory does not merely bypass the
received wisdom among empirically minded
scholars of disgust. It bypasses the
received wisdom among moms and school
moms about basic hygiene, our revulsion
at corpses, feces, and open wounds is
genuinely puzzling to him. Why should we
be so averse to what is actually not
intrinsically harmful to us? Is this a
joke? Is McInn really this obtuse or is
he overstating the mystery in order to
make his theory seem more profound? It
is impossible to tell. Um similarly the
NRAAM philosophical reviews of the uh
the meaning of disgust. Uh this says
this is Daniel Kelly. He says McGin
either ignores or is unaware of one of
the major accounts of disgust and its
evolution. He proceeds without much
appreciating the fact that different
individuals and different groups of
people are liable to be disgusted by
different things. Nowhere does he
consult current empirical literature for
evidence about disgust cross-cultural or
otherwise. The resulting book is as
disappointing as it is irresponsible.
Now, I should point out that McInn has
responded to these negative reviews and
perhaps his responses are successful.
That's not the point. The point is it
just isn't true that McInn tends not to
receive much criticism. There are there
are many philosophers who have openly
accused McInn not just of bad arguments.
I mean, we all make bad arguments
sometimes, but of outright shoddy
scholarship. I mean, that I'm not saying
whether McInn whether these criticisms
are fair or not. I'm just saying they do
exist. So, when McInn says he hasn't
received much criticism, that's false.
He has. Um, but anyway, let's just
suppose that McInn was right that his
work um is very rarely subject to
criticism.
Does this really indicate rightness? Um,
if a philosopher's work tends not to
receive much criticism, what that tells
us is that their work is fairly
conventional. Um, I mean, it's
conventional, at least by the standards
of sort of late 20th to early 21st
century western philosophy. Uh, at
different times and places, the
conventional philosophical views and
even philosophical methodologies have of
course been very different indeed. Um
the problem with taking it that
conventionality helps one to avoid
philosophical error is that philosophy
is a story of fads.
The accepted methodologies and and
ontological commitments of a time may be
radically wrong. I mean take for
instance logical positivism.
Uh the the boring and pedestrian logical
positivist was we now think just
completely mistaken. I mean mistaken not
just about you know the details of their
beliefs but in the very foundations of
their philosophical views. So if you
were to be somebody who held
conventional views during the period of
logical positivism that would not have
done much to help you be correct. So why
assume that the conventional views today
are any better off?
Well, I mean maybe it's just that we
have much better arguments today. I
mean, maybe modern philosophy just has
much better arguments in in I suppose a
similar way to how modern philosophers
have much greater expertise. I have to
say I'm not really sure that's true. So,
take for instance um I mean one of the
most commonly accepted worldviews in
contemporary philosophy is physicalism.
A lot of modern philosophers are
physicists. Um physicalism faces a lot
of problems. Um I mean there's a full of
I think fairly serious issues that can
be raised against physicalism
and there are very few arguments really
in its favor. So take for instance the
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy
introduction to physicalism. It has a
section called the case for physicalism.
And this section, the case for
physicalism in the Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, introduction to
physicalism, which I mean, you know,
it's Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. This is the kind of gold
standard for the the introductions to
things. So, it's like, well, I mean, if
we want some arguments for physicalism,
this is obviously the place to go for
the summary. So the section, the case
for physicalism, begins by just outright
stating that since intellectual culture
tends to take physicalism for granted,
and I quote, the standards of
argumentation required to persuade
someone of the truth of physicalism are
much lower than the standards required
to persuade someone of its negation. Uh
so it just outright begins by saying,
"Yeah, you know, we don't really need to
meet a very high standards here when it
comes to arguing for physicalism." It
then gives two arguments. uh the
argument from causal closure and the
argument from methodological naturalism,
both of which in my opinion are just
obviously terrible. I mean, they're
obviously complete garbage. Um, and I I
do want to point out, you know, the
Stanford Encyclopedia philosophy is not
uniquely poor on this point. Uh, many
philosophers just kind of seem to take
physicalism for granted. Um, but the
actual arguments for it are kind of
rubbish. I have a video where I um it's
called Why Believe Physicalism where I
try to go through uh I try to put a bit
more effort into arguing for physicalism
than the Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy does. Um but uh you know my
own assessment of that video is that
well it doesn't really do a very good
job. I I don't think the arguments for
physicalism are that good. So um I think
we should be very doubtful that you know
contemporary orthodoxy has it right. Um,
okay. So, a further problem I think with
the rightness criterion is that it
encourages a rather close-minded view of
philosophy. I mean, part of the view
point point of doing philosophy is
challenging your own ideas.
Of course, I can say that my goal as a
philosopher is to, you know, gain true
beliefs about philosophy. You know, I
want to know the true answers to
philosophical questions. But then we
might think, you know, if truth is the
goal, then as John Stewart Mill argued,
it's essential to test your ideas and
arguments against viciferous criticism.
If you want to get at the truth, then
you've got to know that your your
arguments are good. And the only way of
knowing that your arguments are good is
by like putting them in in in battle
against other ideas and arguments. So,
you're going to want to explore a wide
range of philosophical ideas. And
perhaps from this point of view, the
best philosopher is not the one who gets
the right answers, but is the one who
comes up with the best defenses of
whatever their position is. A good
defense of a mistaken position can help
other people find their way to the
truth. So, you know, even if we could
reliably identify the truth, I'm not
sure that it would matter quite so much.
So instead of rightness, I want to
suggest a few other criteria. Um, a few
other criteria beyond rightness.
So I'm going to suggest that maybe we
should be looking at originality,
argumentative sophistication and
openness. All right. Originality.
Originality is a matter of coming up
with new ideas, contributing something
genuinely new to the field. Originality,
I suspect, plays a large role in why we
care about influence. Influence is an
indicator of originality. Generally
speaking, a highly influential
philosopher will be a philosopher who,
you know, came up with something new.
Um, a philosopher who spawned a new
conversation. But of course, there are
original ideas that are ignored. Um, and
there are influential philosophers who
get the credit for ideas that other
people came up with. Um
and uh I mean also I mean a philosopher
is not necessarily going to score highly
on originality merely for being present
in the early history of philosophy. Um
interestingly McInn does actually bring
up originality uh in his in his post but
for reasons unstated he doesn't consider
it to be a relevant criterion. Um seems
to me that it is relevant. uh uh unlike
unlike rightness, there are going to be
sensible arguments to be made about
whether one philosopher is more original
than another. I mean, obviously, this
is, you know, there's going to be lots
of different ways of assessing this, but
still, I mean, you know, you can you can
find ways of of assessing originality
beyond just well, do I agree with this
person?
Um, the next criterion is argumentative
sophistication. Again, I you know, this
seems clearly relevant. philosophers
defend their positions through argument.
Uh now we can leave open here exactly
what the standards are for assessing
arguments. Different philosophical
methodologies will point us in different
directions on this point. But you know I
mean look despite the very radical
differences in their approach I think we
can look at somebody you know we can
look at people like say Spininoza or WV
Quin or Max Sterner. I mean these are
people who have very very different
approaches to what philosophy is. But I
think there's some way we can see that
all of them presented sophisticated
arguments. They were arguments that
involved careful reasoning through lots
of steps. And these arguments follow
from, you know, they're they're sort of
embedded in broader views about the aims
and methods of philosophy. So
sophistication here doesn't necessarily
mean, you know, logical sophistication
as though the only way to be
sophisticated is to make philosophy look
like mathematics. as though the only way
to do it is to sort of, you know, make
it as the analytic philosopher would
want, you know, is to make it like, you
know, in adherence to the norms of
formal logic. Um, I mean, again, you
take someone like Max Sterner. Sterner
didn't really care very much about uh
formal logic, but he's he's still
sophisticated. Um, and so, you know, and
of course, you know, I mean, you know,
formal logic is one way of achieving
sophistication, but it's just not the
only way. Um so I mean I think that
again this is going to be very much open
to debate but we can we can debate it.
You know we can talk about it and we can
come to some assessment of who has the
most sophisticated sorts of arguments.
What about openness? Well the point of
this is that there are some philosophers
who seem to be uh they seem to become
kind of captured by their own systems.
So when we consider all of the criteria
so far, one modern candidate for the
best philosopher ever might be David
Lewis. David Lewis had remarkable
expertise. He was a very clear writer.
Admittedly, he was probably more
pedestrian than someone like McInn, but
he was still very clear. He had a wide
breadth of, you know, uh, topics that he
worked on. He was very prolific. Um, you
know, and just like McInn, he tended to
favor common sense. So he didn't incline
towards outlandish claims. Still, he was
prepared to follow the arguments
wherever they led and and sometimes they
did lead him to outlandish claims. Lewis
has plenty of striking original ideas.
His arguments were clearly highly
sophisticated and yet Lewis was very
much a system builder and almost all of
his views kind of flow from his human
supervenience project. Um I have a video
on human supervenience. Um if you want
to know more about what that was. Um but
when you read Lewis I think you do have
the sense that he was you know he was
somebody who was working in the service
of this system and perhaps didn't really
in his own work see very far outside of
his his system you know like all his
work was really within this project. He
would that's what he did and openness
involves a more kind of exploratory
attitude. It doesn't mean that you can't
be a system builder, right? An open
philosopher can still build their build
build a system, but it just means that
sometimes you seriously explore
arguments and ideas outside of that
system and you defend things outside of
that system. So, um I think openness is
is actually something that we should we
should value. um you know it's like
again you know philosophy is about
having a kind of broad understanding of
things and so um that that means you
know not being captured by your own
system. All right with all of that said
who is the best philosopher ever? I mean
who is it who's the best philosopher
ever? Well here are the criteria. Um
I've I've gotten rid of you know
rightness again because of the I think
there are issues with that criterion. So
um you know I'm I'm not so concerned
about that. But um
these are the criteria then we have
expertise, quality of writing, breadth,
quantity, originality, argumentative
sophistication and openness. Um is Colin
McInn the best philosopher ever? Well,
in my judgment, McInn probably scores um
well, as we've seen, you know, he does
have, you know, I suppose I suppose good
expertise. I mean, as as we saw from
some of those criticisms of him, not
everybody is going to see McInn as
having enough expertise. Um, but, you
know, certainly in terms of quality of
writing, breadth and quantity, I think
he scores very well in terms of uh
originality. Um, yeah, I mean, he's he's
I suppose reasonably good on that. Um,
argumentative, sophistication,
um, and openness. Yeah, I mean on on
those three he's reasonably good. I
don't think he's the best on those
though. My favored candidate considering
all the criteria we've seen is Robert
Nosik. Um, so Nosik is contemporary
enough to score very well on expertise
and I mean he just actually just
obviously does have great expertise. He
clearly knew a hell of a lot about the
history of philosophy and he read much
more widely than most analytic
philosophers do. Um, he was a very clear
writer. Um but at the same time he had a
he had a sort of pretty good sort of
literary and stylistic flare. You know
he knew how to communicate philosophy to
both professionals and to lay people and
his books are always just fun to read.
He's he's very I think Nosik is a very
fun writer. Um
uh so he had enormous breadth within
philosophy and beyond it. um he kept up
not just with developments in philosophy
but also in other academic fields and
would often appeal to you know results
in economics or physics or biology to
develop novel philosophical arguments.
Um, so I mean I I I think that you know
when you look at Nosik he he wrote on on
political philosophy on on metaphysics
on philosophy of science on ethics. I
mean he he did he did a lot of stuff um
within philosophy.
Now I would have to grant that McInn
beats Nosik in terms of sheer quantity
but then I mean given some of the
criticisms McInn has received about his
treatment of other fields. McInn seems
to beat uh sorry Nosik seems to beat
McInn um in terms of of sort of
carefulness at least. Um maybe that
should be another criterion. Um quantity
is good but you have to find the right
balance you know. Um if you produce too
much stuff then maybe that's just cuz
you're not reading enough. Uh but um
Nosik was strikingly original. Um so he
worked obviously within analytic
philosophy but a lot of his stuff um you
know Nosik was not a normal analytic
philosopher. Uh it's just I mean again
maybe you just have to go and read his
stuff. It's just obviously
uh the way that he argued for things,
the ideas he explored put him, you know,
he he would explore
uh ideas
within analytic philosophy, you know, he
so he was he was an analytic
philosopher, right? But
he tended to talk about topics that
other analytic philosophers ignored, you
know, like the concept of political
utopia or the meaning of life or the
explanatory power of nothingness.
there's there's stuff that a lot of
other philosophers just didn't care
about. Um he was sort of one of the
first analytic philosoph one of the
first philosophers within the analytic
tradition to really explore these ideas.
He came up with some strikingly original
arguments and his arguments were always
very sophisticated. Um and he was always
open to you know engaging
as I said with with these ideas that a
lot of analytic philosophers of his time
tended to ignore. So I think in terms of
originality, argumentative
sophistication and openness knows it
scores very highly. He was he was
definitely not somebody who was, you
know, captured by his own system. Of
course, he had his own ideas, but he
wasn't captured by them. Um,
so what about my uh personal favorite? I
mean, my favorite, as I've I've often
said, is um is David Hume. Um, well,
clearly Hume um leaves much to be
desired in terms of raw expertise.
Moreover, Hume's system was built on
very questionable foundations.
Foundations which he himself managed to
demolish before actually deriving
anything from them. I mean, forget the
radical skeptical arguments. The missing
shade of blue is enough. But, uh, you
know, Hume Hume did come up with some
remarkable positive proposals like his
projectivist account of causality or his
conventionalist account of property
rights. But, you know, many of his
positive proposals are actually pretty
implausible and derived from principles
that we have no reason to accept. Like
just like Lewis, Hume was definitely
captured by his own system. He scores
very poorly on openness. What makes Hume
special are his skeptical arguments and
his boldness really following in
following empiricist principles wherever
they may lead. But I I don't really
think if we're using these criteria, I
can make a plausible case for Hume. I
think it has to be Nosik. So that's my
candidate for the best philosopher ever.
And that's the end of that video. Thanks
for watching. I'll see you next time.
Bye everybody.