I guess maybe I have a question for you.
I mean, there's something that I'm
curious about which seems to be a sort
of like historical or or sort of
practical or circumstantial um split
between the like type theory community
and the kind of set theory logic
community.
>> Hello. I'm very happy today to have
Emily Rio with us. She is a professor
for mathematic at the John's Hopkins
University and uh I've met her several
times and always enjoy talking to her or
listening to her talks. Um she's an
expert in I would say higher category
theory, right? Is that is fair to say or
how would you describe yourself Emily?
>> Sure. Yeah, that sounds great. Yeah.
>> Okay. So I I just I just looked up
apparently it was Stanwood who who said
category is abstract nonsense. So are
you are you doing higher abstract
nonsense or
>> Sure. Increasingly abstract nonsense
perhaps. Um you know I love that quote
of Stenrod and I think he he meant it
positively. So you know sometimes people
>> you know abstract nonsense is kind of
like queer and that uh different people
mean different things in using that but
it's been embraced by the category
theory community for a certain style of
proof that those of us who are working
in category theory really like. It's
it's what drew me to the field. So yeah,
>> but you didn't get stuck there with
category theory. You you went for the
full monty for higher stuff, right? Um
>> I well I think uh you know so initially
um you know I first became interested in
category theory in a year I spent in at
Cambridge. Uh, I took a course by Peter
Johnstone, you know, a eight-week
>> maybe 10 week I forget how long the
terms are there course in category
theory that covered quite a lot of
material in a short amount of time. I
sort of took the year to kind of fully
absorb the course. And then starting
that summer, I attended my first
international category theory conference
which really gave me a sense of the
research frontiers of the field. And I
found myself drawn to talks that
involved abstract homotopy theory in
some way. So some categorical
abstractions you know such as due to
quillin that allows you to kind of mimic
constructions from homotopy theory and
more general
>> categories and now that is understood as
being some sort of presentation of a
higher dimensional structure on the
category. Um so I guess that's how I got
into higher category theory. Maybe can
you say a few words to about homotropic
theory and what it is and why it
matters.
>> Sure. Uh right. So you know there's this
fundamental mathematical question uh
maybe philosophical question of when is
one thing the same as another thing and
there's different ways that you can
answer it. Um there's uh sort of the
answer um embedded in first order logic.
This is Livinets's incisernability of
identicals or identity of incisernables.
So, you know, two things are the same if
and only if they have exactly the same
properties. Um, but that's not really
how uh mathematicians use this notion of
being the same. You know, mathematicians
tend to be very metaphorical. Um, so to
a so to a category theorists, if you
have two objects that belong to the same
category and they somehow have the same
shape, um, the technical term is
isomorphic. The etmology is roughly that
sort of same shape. um meaning um from
the point of view of all the other
objects in the category they look the
same then they're the same even though
they're not literally equal um they
might be isomeorphic. Um so there are
examples you know in the group theory
you'll learn about different
presentations of groups that end up
having exactly the same structure and
even though the presentations are
different the groups are isomeorphic and
a group theorist would consider them the
same. Um you know in linear algebra any
you know finite dimensional any
10-dimensional vector space is
considered the same as any other
10-dimensional vector space depending on
choice of basis you know you might need
explicit isomeorphisms to identify them.
Uh so you know that's sort of one
perspective of um what sameness means
but uh that's often not even flexible
enough. So um
>> can I just because it it rings the bell
what you just said. Um so this you you
think the liets principle suggests um uh
a more intentional equality so to say.
Uh but as as you know I'm coming from
type theory.
>> Sure. uh and um I'm I'm I'm actually I'm
a big fan of this lienet principle
because um how do you actually how do
you actually uh describe the difference
of two things which you which you call
isomorphic uh you you have to observe
the internal structure and in my in my
world you're not even permitted to do
this right so so this principle of
equality of incisernables is actually
valid in in in tax theory in in in in
hot, right?
>> Yes. So, right, you um you interrupted
my sort of attempt to give a more
classical account of what homotopy
theory is. And I I didn't mean uh
>> maybe maybe we'll return to that and
then we can come back to new
perspectives on linenets's in
discernability of identicals in
homotopic type theory for instance. But
um but anyway, all I was going to say is
um you know there are uh mathematical
objects that um you know mathematicians
working in the area would consider to be
the same even though they are not
isomorphic. Um you know sort of the
>> example everybody uh likes to mention is
you know to a a topologist of a certain
bent um you know a coffee cup and a a
donut are the same. Um, I don't think
that's a great example because those
spaces are actually homeomorphic, which
is to say isomeorphic in the category of
spaces. But an example I like better is
a, you know, pair of pants and a thong.
Um, you know, these spaces are are
homotopia equivalent. And if you're
interested in, you know, sort of
counting how many holes there are in the
space or how many higher dimensional
holes there are in this the space, the
answers would be the same, even though
the thong sort of is one-dimensional in
some sense and the pair of pants is
two-dimensional in and sort of some
sense. And so what homotopy theory is
about is it's a a a language that allows
you to treat objects that are not
isomorphic but are equivalent or perhaps
weakly equivalent as nevertheless being
the same. Uh
but anyway, what what Torson was
referring to um just now is um you know
I'm you probably have a better sense of
this history than I do frankly but you
know maybe I'll describe it as some sort
of new perspectives on the
iniccernability of identicals. So the
way I was or what I was imagining when I
mentioned it earlier is it's uh you know
this is the way equality is aimatized in
in first order logic
>> and so I was uh thinking of the notion
of equality that
>> uh is kind of familiar in in set theory
where um you know two sets are equal
sort of if and only if they have exactly
the same elements and you know if the
elements have slightly different names
but are sort of in one to one
correspondence that's not that's not
what equal means.
in set theory. Um,
>> yes,
>> but but as as you well know, this is
very far from how equal gets used in a
mathematics paper. If you if you read a
mathematician's paper, they'll often
write equals when they really mean
isomorphic or maybe even something
weaker than that. And um there are other
approaches to foundations um you know
using MartinLof identity types um but
maybe without equality reflection so
intentionally rather than extentially
that are compatible with in
disccernability of identicals and uh
more flexible allow sort of a more um
metaphorical uh meaning of equality.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. Okay. So, so you you you obviously
you you come from a sort of classical
mathematical background and uh you you
you only learned about this sort of
exotic stuff like type theory uh later.
So, so
>> and I might qualify that even more
strongly. So the you know I mean the
mathematics curriculum in the United
States which is where I'm from is a bit
different I'd say than elsewhere in the
world. I mean you know part of that is
an artifact of our uh liberal arts
system. So
>> as an undergraduate I was a mathematics
concentrator meaning I took more
mathematics courses than courses in any
other topic. But of the you know 32-ish
courses I took as an undergrad that
meant 12 of them were math courses. and
I spent the rest of the time taking, you
know, music theory and queer theory and
American intellectual history and and,
you know, modern British novel and
various other things. Um,
>> so in in this sort of condensed
undergraduate mathematics curriculum,
there often isn't much time for logic
and in in particular, I didn't study
logic and foundations as an
undergraduate. I did not study it as a
as a graduate student when I earned my
PhD. I'm almost certainly could not have
told you the axioms of set theory. or
melo Frank set theory
>> not many people can
>> you know as a postocck I I taught the
undergraduate logic course which was
offered in the department I just I just
didn't end up taking it and I I learned
a lot then about sort of classical
>> approaches to foundations and then sort
of around the same time I was getting
exposure to an interest in homotopy type
theory and that's how I got into other
perspectives you know
>> so maybe I I know some part of the
audience will hate me for that That's
for me that was quite quick already and
we mixed already quite a lot of
disciplines and I'm I'm not a category
theorist at all. So I come from set
theory. Is it uh okay if I ask would it
be fine for you to give like a very
rough idea of category theory for that
part of the audience that's not there
and maybe if there is something like
your own perspective in particular
because you have a lovely introductory
book category theory in context right um
which I guess many people take as like a
good first step into this realm
>> great um yes I'd love to describe
category theory. So, um I think a big uh
innovation that sort of separated 20th
century mathematics from 19th century
mathematics was the idea that if you're
interested in a particular sort of
mathematical object um like a group um
you might productively study it by
considering also the homamorphisms
between groups. Uh so this is an insight
that I associate with Emmy Nurther um
among others and um the so even if
you're just interested in in studying
properties of individual groups somehow
treating them as a collective and
looking at the way the sort of
relationships between one group and
another which are um depicted using
arrows with a domain being one group and
a a co-domain being another group. um
and these are sort of structure
preserving functions called homorphisms
that that was sort of an important
insight and led to new breakthroughs in
group theory and simultaneously a
similar um perspective was being applied
in other disciplines. So you know
topologists were interested in
distinguishing one space for the other
maybe by means of some sort of numerical
invariant or polomial invariant and
around the same time it was discovered
that if you're invariant uh somehow
respected continuous functions between
spaces then it meant it was a lot easier
to compute and had more powerful
information. So a way to describe what
these uh discoveries are doing
simultaneously is they're um moving from
studying individual objects of a
particular type. So groups or
topological spaces to studying the
category of groups or the category of
topological spaces. So a category has
both objects but also arrows sometimes
called morphisms sometimes called
homamorphisms between them that satisfy
a few certain axioms and unlock the
possibility of a completely new style of
definition. So you can characterize
constructions on the objects in terms of
their effect on the morphisms. For
instance, in fact you can identify
everything you ever want to know about
an object in a category in terms of the
morphisms to other objects um as a
consequence of something called the
innate lema. And so the this sort of the
insights that um launched category
theory. And then another thing that it
can do is it can help unify different
mathematical disciplines. So there are
some facts that are true of groups and
true of spaces and true of vector spaces
and true of other things for exactly the
same reason. Um and it's because uh you
can abstract them to the level of a
generic category and generic objects and
uh in a generic relationship and prove
the theorem at that level of generality.
Uh so these are the proofs by abstract
nonsense that we were alluding to
earlier and its effect is that it'll
isolate the aspects of any particular
mathematical discipline that are sort of
formal or that are true for very general
reasons um you know it uh or it can be
understood via analogy to a completely
other discipline from the aspects that
are particular to that discipline. So
anyway,
>> just a little note uh as you as you I
guess you know this is category theory
also became increasingly popular in in
in in computer science via via
functional programming where people
usually use Haskell they see like monets
and factors and whatever so that's a a
different uh point of access but it
shows already as you said that it's
quite sort of universal right
>> yeah that's right I mean uh you know
category theory among other things is a
language um that allows you to very
efficiently express some rather
complicated constructions and it makes
it easier to define and study you know
new kinds of mathematical objects that
weren't uh considered or weren't so easy
to think about before. So that you know
sort of the fundamental objects that one
studies these days in algebraic geometry
are um defined using categorical
language. uh same in modern homotope
theory. um you know in computer science
there are some uh you know categories
that are you don't you don't sort of
stumble across in nature but you can um
build um I'm thinking maybe specifically
the Kley construction associated to a
monad uh that you know handle
computational effects uh in a very
elegant
>> way um so
>> so it's actually a way to structure
programs in uh in you use computer of
category theory is often just a way to
yeah to to to modular modist
programs right and is it quite bit maybe
different or is there a similarity with
mathematics you would say is category
theory useful to structure I think it is
isn't it or
>> I I guess I would say so and I I mean
I'm thinking you know uh you know growth
indeed's work in algebraic geometry in
the mid 20th century you know he ended
up creating a whole bunch of category
theory in uh pursuit of you introducing
new sort of structures, new new
techniques in algebraic geometry. So
absolutely
>> may I follow up with a very another
knife question and I mean now you you
sketched beautifully this idea of the
bird's eye perspective of um and and now
what makes like is it possible to talk
about all kind of structures or is there
even like in category theory at some
point you need like more complex
categories and if I'm not mistaken this
is also part of this higher category
theory or infinite uh categories is
there a way to understand that as an
outsider or is that only accessible
after some category theory?
>> Yeah. So I mean there there are
certainly limitations to category
theory. So so one of them is they you
know they deal with the general aspects
of any particular mathematical
subdiscipline not the particular ones.
So um you know and there's an area
called representation theory which is
considering sort of groups in terms of
their actions on a vector space and some
you know maybe about half of
representation theory is very formal. Um
there's uh you know if you have a
subgroup you can construct something
called an induced representation and
this is an instance of a very general
category theoretic construction and so
the properties of induced
representations can be proven formally
um sort of much more abstractly. But
then there are other aspects of
representation theory that are more
particular to the subject. So you know
the particular irreducible
representations of a particular family
of groups um I you know can't always be
understood using category theory. So
that's that's one sort of limitation. Um
you know category theory is really a
collection of proof techniques and those
techniques apply to some kinds of
problems and not to other kinds of
problems. Um but another sort of
limitation which is uh leading us
towards higher category theory is some
kinds of mathematical objects really
live in a more complicated mathematical
setting. And um so the first examples
are either something like a topological
space or a a chain complex. Um so for
topological spaces kind of the default
notion of homorphism between them is a
is a continuous function. And so this is
a function between the underlying sets
of points that uh somehow respects the
topology. Um but uh
that's kind of not the end of the story.
So you might imagine two different
topological spaces uh you know let's say
um you know one of them is the circle
and the other one is the Taurus. So this
the sort of surface of a donut and we
could have uh two different continuous
functions from the circle into the
surface of the donut. So imagine like
tracing out a loop on the the surface of
the Taurus. Uh so um depending on which
specific loops I you're imagining
tracing on the surface of the Taurus, um
they may or may not be homotopic. Uh and
homotopic means you could kind of defi
continuously deform one loop onto the
other loop without sort of slicing
through the the donut or you know
leaving the surface or some or something
like this. And um what this homotopy
should be understood is it's it's also a
a kind of morphism but it's a higher
dimensional morphism that exists between
the two continuous functions that we
were imagining. And it's it's um giving
an extra dimension of information um to
this situation. And then there's a
notion of homotopy between homotopy
which would be a higher dimensional
morphism between these higher
dimensional morphisms. So we've gone
from objects in dimension one to
morphism sorry objects in dimension zero
to morphisms in dimension one to
homotopes in dimension two to higher
homotopes in dimension three and four
and five and six and that goes on add
infin item uh and um if you ignore this
higher structure or quotient out by this
higher structure you're losing some
information and so there are certain
questions about spaces that really uh
cannot be answered very well or u at the
level of the ordinary category of spaces
and continuous uous functions but um are
better approached in the higher category
the infinity category of spaces
continuous functions and all the higher
homotopes
it's interesting that I mean that you
naturally use a example from homotropy
theory but uh you're not mentioning
something like the category of
categories and and and so on which from
a computer science point of view would
be the s of
natural
way to look but Yeah. So that's that's
also another route into higher category
theory. So you know categories have a
notion of morphism between them which is
called functer. Um but even in the 1940s
the original paper on category theory it
was not about categories nor was it
about functors. It was about the higher
dimensional morphisms between functors
which are called natural
transformations. And um yeah so category
theory is itself a higher dimensional
subject. Mhm.
Actually um in in sort of traditional
category theory um people usually say
that the category of categories is just
a category and uh in in in in the world
I live this is sort of slightly wrong.
Um what's your uh feeling about this? I
mean
>> uh I guess I don't know what you're
referring to. Um I uh so I think of the
category of categories most naturally as
a two category. Um
>> exactly that's what I Yeah.
>> Yeah. Adding in the hieromorphisms. Um I
guess you could say the the one category
of categories is what's called cartisian
closed. So it has uh objects inside it
which are funer categories and inside
those functor categories you have these
higher dimensional morphisms. So that's
a trick sometimes in which a higher
category can be um accessed via just a
lower categorical structure. Um
>> so a one a an ordinary one-dimensional
category that is cartisian closed is
enriched over itself and so in these
internal h objects you can access some
sort of enhanced structure. I I I just
meant because um in a sense um equality
of of objects uh is more complicated or
in in the hot language is not a
proposition
>> and in this sense uh uh the category of
categories isn't just an ordinary
category but as you say it's a two
category
>> but that comes from this
>> I see
>> time theoretic perspectives
>> yeah I mean another uh you know so a
thing that I've a practice that I've
engaged in more over the past uh decade
is uh computer formalization and yeah
you know whether we're you know so um so
uh giving definitions about categories
and constructions about categories
proving theorems about categories not
just on pen and paper but uh
interactively with a computer proof
assistant and um
>> uh so the computer proof assistants are
uh often implement a formal system
called dependent type theory not uh um
um you know which is a different
approach to foundations and um and I'm
completely setting aside uh homo sort of
categories and homotopy type theory
let's say
>> dependent type theory in the sense
that's implemented in the computer proof
assistant lean where
>> identity types are propositions and you
have
>> uh proof of relevance of propositions
and so on but um but there's an
interesting design decision in
explaining what a category is
>> in dependent type theory. Um
>> uh so a category has sort of two types
two two sorts of objects. There's the
objects of a category and then there's
the arrows in a category. And so you
could define a category to have a type
of objects and a type of arrows and then
there are source and target functions
between the objects and the arrows and
identity functions and a composition
function and some axioms and so on. Or
you could define a category to have a
type of objects and then a dependent
type of arrows. So given you know rather
than having a type that consists of all
of the arrows in the category having uh
for any pair of objects a type of arrows
from the first object to the second
object. Um and uh you know somehow that
one decision
you know has huge stakes for the way
everything else is is formalized
thereafter. um in a way that I find
quite interesting. Um uh so so I mean
for instance like a lot of uh statements
that one would write on paper um you
know particularly when we're considering
sort of equality between functors or um
you know don't even type check uh
>> uh if you take the the second
perspective where you're defining the
morphisms to be a dependent type. So to
to prove that one functor is equal to
some other functor um you would prove
firstly that for all objects in the
domain category these functors act the
same way on the objects and then on
paper I would say and the same thing for
the morphism. So for all morphisms in
the domain category, the functors act
the same way on the morphisms. But um
but that statement now will involve an
equality between an arrow in one hom
type and an equality between an arrow
and a different hom type. And you have
to kind of transport along the proofs of
equality between the objects to get
those two arrows to belong to the same
type. Um
anyway, I think I think this is sort of
an interesting feature when it comes to
formalizing even one category theory in
the proof assistant lean which adopts
this second definition.
>> There rais an question we had on our
very first episode of about logic with
Kevin Bazat. We had a discussion between
Kevin and to whether you can or can or
should use lean without opening up the
foundation so to speak and I mean
clearly for some mathematician it's
works fine without opening anything and
for others maybe not and could you say
how is it for you can you do your your
most advanced work e so to speak just on
input packages and start doing or do you
always need to open the packages
>> right so Um I uh I have been formalizing
some proofs in lean but also in other
proof assistants. And the reason I'm
also working in other proof assistance
is because I'm formalizing proofs that
just cannot uh work in lean right now.
And um you know particularly uh when it
comes to sort of higher dimensional
categories um you know you can give a
definition of an infinity category in
lean um using something called the quasi
category model. So that that definition
exists um but it's essentially like um
taking this notion of an infinite
dimensional category and kind of
compiling it out to the the foundations
of mathematics. So you know
traditionally we think of u mathematical
objects as built you know with a bunch
of sets and you know functions and
structures and axioms and so on and so
forth. Um and the problem is that an
infinite dimensional category isn't
really built out of sets. You could sort
of give it a presentation or give it
coordinates and pretend that it's built
out of sets. You can build one out of
sets and but it's it's sort of not the
most natural um approach to the
definition. sort of morally a uh
infinite dimensional category should be
built out of um something called
homotopy types orma or infinity
groupoids. Um sort of these are
topological spaces but really considered
only up to homotopy equivalence or weak
homotopi equivalents. And um in other
approaches to foundations uh you know
homotopi type theory is described as a
sort of synthetic theory of homotopi
types. um when you say you have a type
it's it automatically has this kind of
higher dimensional structure and you
know rather than build it in laboriously
it's just there and I you can give a
much more efficient definition of what
an infinity category is if homotopy type
theory is the background language and
you know starting from a simpler
definition will also simplify
formalizations so um so I'm part of uh
two collaborative formalization projects
attempting to formalize some infinity
category theory in two different proof
assistants, one of which is lean and the
other of which is something called RK or
RZK.
>> And we've gotten a lot further in RK and
even though the proof assistant is much
more primitive just because the
foundation system is a lot more
amendable to the type of math we're
trying to do.
>> Can you maybe
expand this a little bit? Um, so I think
the this quasi uh category approach is
sort of what you could call analytic.
there's a concrete definition of what an
infinity category is but at the same
time
>> it's it's always it's almost unusable
and and I think you you mentioned that
that there was actually in one of your
talks uh that it was actually a bug in
the definition which nobody noticed
because nobody did anything with it
right and
>> yeah so the notion of quasi category is
definitely usable on paper and uh you
know for students that it's kind of nice
because it's relatively concrete. If
you're a student who uh you know is very
comfortable with ordinary
one-dimensional category theory and has
maybe already met simplicial sets by
taking an algebraic topology course,
then you can explain what a quasi
category is. But um and and it's kind of
like uh giving a a I I do use the term
analytics, but it's like explaining
infinity categories, but we're choosing
coordinates everywhere. And the
coordinates sort of don't matter, and
you want to make sure that your
construction are independent of the the
choice of coordinates, but nevertheless,
they're baked into the definition.
>> So you you can um from that notion
>> uh you know state and prove a bunch of
theorems. it often involves a lot of
technical um what what we would call
combinotaurics though it's it's sort of
a combinatorics of infinite sets so a
combinatorialist might disagree um but
in a proof assistant it turns out this
is just very very very difficult so so
what Thorson is alluding to is the fact
that a closely related definition of a
con complex which is the analytic
perspective on infinity groupoids um
that was wrong for maybe several years
uh and it's because and it was wrong in
a way that if anybody had tried to prove
any theorems with it, they would have
caught the mistake. But um but there
were essentially no theorems that had
been proven about quasi categories or
con complexes in lean until very
recently. Um the the main success is a
master's thesis of Jack McCoen who um
successfully proved that if X and Y are
quasi categories or really Y is the only
one that needs to be a quasi category
then the sort of internal hal Y to the X
is again a quasi category. This is a is
a sort of very very fundamental result.
You can't do anything in quasi category
theory without that result. Um but there
are a lot of details in that proof and
it took I think a year and a half to
formalize. It is still being PRD into
math lib. Um it really is dis makes you
feel desparing of formalizing anything
more complicated than that given how
hard it was to do this very fundamental
thing. So
>> I mean here's a question. Is this um
synthetic approach is this just I mean
more convenient because you you you get
rid of the spoiler plate or is it the
different conceptual approach to do
mathematics?
>> Uh right. So one way to think about it
is it's you're putting an convenient
kind of abstraction boundary around the
notion of a quasi of infinity category.
um you know which is a well-known uh
kind of method in engineering I take I
take it um uh yes um in the literature
um when researchers use infinity
categories they often don't use quasi
categories um they sort of prefer to
work model independently so sort of
implicitly in reference to some axioms
that maybe haven't quite been written
down anywhere of things that ought to be
true about infinity categories and have
been proven proven in the quasi category
model somewhere we hope. Uh and we're
just going to argue from those
principles rather than explain exactly
the effect of these constructions on
quasi categories. That's that's sort of
what's happening already in the pen and
paper literature. Um but I should say
that the the
what's happening in the synthetic
approach is kind of more radical than
that in the same way that uh you know
homotopic type theory I would say is a
more radical perspective on homotopic
theory than just saying we're going to
introduce some axioms. Um you know in in
homotopic type theory you're also sort
of changing uh the the kind of meaning
of the logical operations. um you know
when you say there exists some x and c
so that for all y and c x equals y in
the homotopi type theory um what that
means is something a bit different uh so
firstly this exists is interpreted
constructively so it it provides you an
explicit choice of a point x and c um
the for all y and c is interpreted in a
continuous fashion so it um and the
equals x equals y is interpreted as the
the choice of a path so we're
I'm given an explicit point which I'll
call the center of contraction. So that
for all other points Y, I'm continuously
choosing a path from X to Y. And what
that means is this sort of sentence that
in first order logic would assert that
the set C has a unique element in
homotopi type theory interprets that the
type C is a contractable space. So sort
of something more powerful and and
that's um extremely convenient from the
perspective of higher category theory
when contractability is the only meaning
of a uniqueness that uh ever makes any
sense. So sort of similarly the these
kind of uh reinterpretations of the
logical operations mean that in the
synthetic approach to infinity
categories any function from infinity
category A to infinity category B that I
specify by perhaps explaining what it
does on the objects um is automatically
a functor of infinity categories and and
that's something that's very difficult
on pen and paper like actually defining
an explicit functor between explicit
infinity categories stories is something
you basically never do because there'd
be an infinite amount of higher
dimensional coherence checks. It's kind
of completely infeasible. You always use
some trick appealing to some kind of
universal property or some sort of magic
reason why this functor exists. But in
in ordinary one category, you often do
just define functors. You say for every
object in the category A, here's the
corresponding object in the category B.
And for every morphism in the category
A, here's the corresponding morphism in
the in the category B. And you can do
something a lot more like that in this
synthetic approach to infinity
categories because we've sort of uh kind
of reinterpreted the entire formal
system not just uh given axioms for
infinity categories. So you you
emphasized convenience again but what
you described before is that like maybe
the natural way mathematicians of reason
is I mean as you say not really uh
in detail analytics or analytics is just
used as a reference but maybe they they
they use some sort of synthetic some
some halfbaked synthetic reasoning and
and maybe this sort of more developed
synthetic mathematics is sort of filling
this gap.
>> Yeah, I think the the dream for the
future and and your account of the
development of this is is very very
accurate. I think uh a lot of new
mathematics is sort of halfbaked for a
long time and you kind of backfill the
rigor uh
>> um you know so I mean as I understand it
like caner's work on infinity sort of uh
predated a rigorous axmatization of set
theory for instance and you know a lot
of the work on calculus kind of uh
>> predated a rigorous understanding of of
of what calculus is and you know that's
s sort of as it should be but um but I
think the the sort of modern hope is
that as you kind of backfill these uh
synthetic systems, um they become sort
of formal to the point that you could
teach the rules to a computer and then
build a computer proof assistant that
would then allow you to sort of kind of
rapidly confirm
uh I mean try to prove false and you
know sort of check the consistency of
these axioms maybe in a empirical way
rather than a a sort of meta
>> theoretical way. um you know and and
also just get used to the new synthetic
framework. So in my uh personal
experience of learning homotopi type
theory I you know first heard a bunch of
lectures and then you know read pieces
of the hot book and then tried to do
some exercises in in pen and paper and I
wasn't entirely sure that I had
everything right. Um
uh and in uh then I taught a course in
homotopi type theory and um as a
challenge to myself um wrote all the
problem sets for this course using AGDA
and so I spent you know like a lot of
time every week sort of writing and
solving these AGDA problem sets that I
was developing and I I very quickly
caught the kind of little tiny errors
that I was making. So um you know I was
working
>> you use cubicle octa or was it just
vanilla
>> vanilla eggda
>> okay
>> yeah vanilla eggda um but you know with
the with the feedback of the proof
assistant you know ever since then I
feel very confident now doing pen and
paper homotopi type theory I know um
because I have this sort of experience
where a bunch of slightly wrong ideas
were were corrected by the proof
assistant um
>> so I I find also it's a good for me it's
a good way to teach uh certain things uh
because the the is the the students can
as you say intuitively learn uh what is
the correct way of reasoning without
having to see any sort of formal rules.
I mean so the tension is you can give
the sort of informal uh explanation but
they often yeah informal and uh unound
or you can say okay we here we have a
formal system but who understands the
formal system
>> but then this computer's proof system is
of a nice middle ground that you can
acquire the intuition what is a great
proof by by using it and then maybe you
don't actually need it anymore because
you have acquired this intuition
>> right and of Like it's also nice to get
immediate feedback. I mean that you know
a big problem in mathematics pedagogy is
students do the homework and then by the
time they get it back a week later
nobody's thinking about the problem
anymore. It's it's much nicer to be
corrected immediately.
>> So
>> and that's embarrassing because it's
just the computer not not the tutor.
Right. So yeah. Uh actually related to
this uh are you using AI? Have you tried
to do uh proofs using uh one of the uh
AI uh implementations like
>> uh yes so so currently there are auto
formalization agents that are targeting
lean. Um there not anything specific
targeting other proof assistants that
I'm aware of. Um but I have been
experimenting a little bit with AIS
targeting lean in a couple different
capacities. So um you know I've been
testing their capabilities with ordinary
one category theory just um you know
initially I was uh kind of very
skeptical that these systems would be
able to do much of anything um uh just
because you know one category theory
it's more about constructing definitions
than proving theorems and lean treats
those two activities somewhat somewhat
differently and indeed that that does
seem to be a limitation for some of the
autoformalization agents. Um more
recently I've been uh you know testing
whether um these kind of elementary on
pen and paper arguments involving
simplicial sets and and quasi categories
uh whether some of the sort of invisible
mathematics could be automated away with
AI. Um I've not had a lot of success
there yet I would have to say um
>> just because I think there are kind of a
lot of a lot of technical details but um
but um I should say I I I much prefer to
interact with uh an auto formalization
agent uh than a large language model in
discussing mathematics because um you
know the large language models will uh
feed you a lot of um you know
>> um and in particular um just in the last
few weeks I've And um you know I'm
currently in the process of revising my
category theory book and I was uh you
know trying to de develop a few new
counter examples. So um you know if you
drop hypothesis X from theorem Y um
conclusion Z is false that sort of
thing. And you know when I uh you know
so first thing I should do is do a
literature search. Do these counter
examples exist in the literature? And um
uh you know if if something is in the
literature, a large language model is
pretty good at surfacing it. But if it's
if it's not in the literature, it'll
sort of blame the literature for the
fact that it's not able to come up with
the counter example. And so
>> or doesn't make it up,
>> right? So that's it would say, you know,
but this this is a well-known mistake in
exercise 6.2. V of reals category theory
and context. So then I go to the
bookshelf and indeed there's no exercise
6.2. And so I I did not make a mistake.
Um but uh anyway um at some point I sort
of gave that up and you know came up
with my own counter example. Uh and then
I asked uh uh Harmonics which is one of
these AI startups agent Aristotle to
verify it for me in lean as a kind of
extra check that my counter example was
correct. Um I did not ask a large
language model for this because if they
tell me it's correct I I feel like that
gives me no assurance really. But um but
indeed uh
>> you know this is something in one
category theory and Aristotle was able
to confirm that it is a valid counter
example. So yeah,
>> I mean I think this is a nice of
combination of AI and uh formal proofs
because if you don't trust AI the as
long as the II can produce a formal
proof then uh
it's trustworthy, right?
>> Well the so there's some caveats there
that you know experienced users are well
aware of but I'd like to state for the
record. So, so you know, caveat number
one, uh, so, so you know, what the AI is
is producing is the source text for a or
the user input text for a computer proof
assistant and you're rely relying on the
proof assistant to type check it. And
um, what a proof assistant is doing is
it will verify that uh, stated proof in
fact proves the stated statement. Um, it
does not verify that the stated
statement is the one that was intended.
And in particular, if you know part of
what your auto formalization agent is
doing is providing new definitions, it's
um quite possible um that the statement
is wrong. And and this could be in a
relatively uh innocuous way. So, you
know, for for example, for my teaching,
I was preparing a demo for my students
of a a formal proof in lean that the
square root of two is irrational. And so
I open up my lean file and I write
theorem square root of two is
irrational. And then I'm in the middle
of writing the proof and all of a sudden
I or um notice some things that are
suspicious. Um and it turns out that uh
lean has um various different versions
of the square root function. Um one is
in the name space you know it's sort of
rationals square root and what it is is
it's kind of like some sort of rational
approximation to the the square root of
function and that's the one that I had
used in the statement. So um so the
theorem as I had stated at square roo of
two is irrational was false because for
th this version of the irrational
function it was in fact true. Um so you
know so that was a mistake that I made
not an AI but um
>> but you know when when complex
definitions are involved you really
really really really have to check that
they mean exactly what you think they
do. Um um the other thing is we've seen
a few we meaning the lean community has
seen a few examples where um an AI kind
of tries to cheat somehow. So
>> you know a thing that it could do for
instance is add an extra axiom you know
axiom 0 equals 1 to the top of the file
>> um presented in a kind of obscure way
and then and you know then it can prove
whatever you want and it'll pass the
type checker because certainly assuming
Z equals one whatever you're trying to
prove is true. um uh or uh you know sort
of other kind of behaviors like that.
>> It could it could exploit a recently
discovered inconsistency in the poof
system, right? I mean,
>> right. Exactly. Right. There's always
the possibility of bugs in the kernel.
So, so um anyway, what what I would
certainly go on the record of saying is
that a autoformalized proof is more
reliable than a natural language proof.
Um I guess maybe depending on the
subject area there's uh you know there's
some areas where the you know the
mathematics library just is nowhere near
the statement and so there's no chance
that the statement is correct in which
case the autoformmalization is sort of a
fantasy from the start but um but within
a domain that is covered by a human
engineered mathematics library I would
say an autoformalized proof is more
reliable than a natural language proof
and um but you know but there's still a
role for human referees.
>> Actually, I wonder a bit because we we
talked about lots of convenience that
synthetic mathematics more convenient,
but if you have just throw enough AI on
it, then maybe this problem sort of
disappears because the AI is just happy
to to prove everything with quasi
categories which humans would not be
able to to manage, right? Or
>> I I strongly disagree with that. I mean
there's definitely a role for AI in
formalization which is to make it
easier. You know I you know right now
some I mean sometimes people talk about
the de Brun index which is technically
like the the amount of lines of formal
code that correspond to lines of natural
language proof. Um I think a more
relevant factor is how much time it
takes to write a formal proof versus a
natural language proof. And everybody
working in the space would prefer it to
take less time. And if an AI can help
with that that would be great. But um
proof quality still matters. I mean uh
you know there's no permanent place in
the in the world for ugly mathematics.
And and similarly um you know what we're
the process of formalizing is not just
about checking that a theorem is true
but building a library that is usable as
the basis for further formalization
efforts and code quality there matters
enormously and so um I don't want a
sloppy unreadable
in incredibly long proof of some fact of
quasi categories. I think it's worth um
the effort of figuring out a way to do
this in a way that's actually um
understandable to humans and can be used
as the basis for getting to the
frontiers of mathematics the research
frontiers of mathematics. I I
wholeheartedly agree with this but there
was a discussion in computer science
right so we have so we try to uh I mean
suggest of high level programming
languages which supports abstraction and
so on which is similar to what you what
you describe in mathematics we like to
write programs nice programs yeah but
actually now with AI you you can
generate these programs and then the
question is do you actually need this
these high level languages because the
AI can also could use a similar code
which is maybe not as readable but in
the end what matters is it runs. I mean
uh but maybe that's different in
mathematics.
>> I guess I'd be surprised if computer
scientists are willing to abandon
everything but Python because of the
existence of AI. Um and I think
mathematicians similarly you know won't
accept a future where the only formal
langu system is lean. So
>> sure I mean I agree but I mean there is
this this tension I mean this
possibility that all this sort of high
level stuff actually uh doesn't really
matter so much anymore because AI
bridges the gap. I mean it's not a
future I would I would like but
it's a possibility. Just the the tiny
remark that we had similar discussions
when computer usage in general entered
mathematics, right? The forc color
theorem
>> was celebrated but also hated because
some mathematicians said, you know, we
just have this huge case distinction but
this lovely beautiful problem is dead
now and the highass mathematician won't
touch it and maybe they would have found
out new techniques or deeper
understanding or whatever. Mhm.
>> But then later even though it was proven
still the best graph theorist tried to
repro it, shorten the amount of cases
needed
>> and things like that.
>> No, I had a a bit more personal question
which um uh it's a question of you as a
woman. I mean uh obviously well I I
think in mathematics it's still uh
gender imbalance and uh maybe can you
comment on this and do you think it's
something you should overcome or is this
an issue and if if so how? Yeah, I I
guess I will say I still think it is
harder in some ways for a woman who is
entered mathematics to kind of find
interested in mathematics to find her
way into the community than it is for
some other folks. Um you know I know a
lot of young women who uh you know feel
that extra pressure um whenever they
want to ask a question in class for
instance that um you know the sort of
quality of the question or the the fact
that the question reveals that they
haven't already understood something
will then reflect negatively on you know
their entire gender. Um, I think that's
still a very very real experience and
you can imagine sort of two parallel
students, one of which feels like they
can ask questions with abandon and one
of which can never ask questions at all
and you know who's going to be in a
better position a few years
>> down the road. um
>> uh not so much within the math research
community but at lower levels. I also
hear a lot of stories of students who
are sort of explicitly discouraged from
you know going into um mathematics you
know by a teacher in a high school or
you know somebody trying to push them
you know to take easier courses or to
say you know this isn't really for you.
I mean it's shocking that that still
happens but that does still happen. Um,
you know, I think at the kind of more
advanced levels, what that means in a
sense that the the sort of women who
make it are uh kind of tougher in some
sense, have have maybe spent more time
thinking about like, do I really want to
be a mathematician? Is this is this the
career that I'm looking for? And and
then, you know, tend to have the
persistence and um to kind of carry it
through because they've already sort of
had, you know, thought critically about
whether there's maybe some other use of
their time. Um, so yeah, I I think we
should still be mindful, you know, not
just along the gender axis, but along
other axes about how kind of different
uh experiences might affect our students
and who's encouraged to continue. Um, I
certainly uh have a lot more fun at
conferences where there are more women.
Um, just sort of socially, I think it it
makes a difference. I I I feel less
pressure when I'm asking a question in a
in a conference if there's a lot of
other women in the conference asking
questions, too. and um you know but
we're we're tren t t t t t t t t t t t t
t t t t t t t t trending in the right
direction and I think as long as people
are still kind of mindful that not
everybody gets to the classroom and with
the same experiences um I think things
will continue to improve. So
>> lovely educational comment or comment on
education or what however to phrase it.
Um, may I ask you is there anything else
you would love to speak about that we
missed where we're too narrow on inner
math or
>> I guess maybe I have a question for you.
Um, so
>> I mean there's something that I'm
curious about which seems to be uh
kind of a I don't know how to describe
this but a a sort of like historical or
or sort of practical or um uh
circumstantial um split between the like
type theory community and the kind of
set theory logic community. Um, I don't
know if this is part of your experience,
if you have any explanation for it. Um,
I'm very curious about how this came
about. Um, or if I'm accurate in
describing it that way. And I and I I
guess I mean maybe within mathematics as
opposed to within uh computer science.
Um,
>> I think I mean that's a great question.
I I have my own account, but I'm not
sure whether it's historically accurate.
>> Um, so shall I start to or
>> Yeah. Yeah. Glue it.
>> Yeah. So I I guess I come from the
setary side of things and I I mean um I
would say two things. Um whenever some
mindset or some tradition is kind of
dominant, they might not look at the
others or the next tradition with with
the full um respect that they should. I
mean I think that's generally true. It's
not really only on set, but it's like
okay there's this weird category stuff
but I don't really care. I I can do
everything in principle and I mean
rightly so. I guess in some sense you
can always reinterpret and
>> emulate things when of course on your
high level you see where this emulation
>> misses a tiny spot or isn't fully
accurate but in some sense you do that
>> and then there was not as much
communication at which would have been
good and then we have contingent factors
like one mailing list whichever was just
set to dominant and
>> category comments get discouraged
>> and Then people start their their own
forums, own communities
>> and then we have a lot of more division
than necessary so to speak. And the
other the other thing is maybe that
category theory had more interest in
these higher physics
things than set theory because
historically back then we just needed
the foundation to prove a point but we
never really used the foundation. Right?
>> Uhhuh. didn't touch that but that's only
my historically inaccurate account to
what do you think
>> can I have a add more I think you asked
about community but I would like to add
a personal perspective actually I give
gave a talk uh few years ago at Lambla
days in Kraov and uh I I started it with
a programming language CV and I I I
tracked down what programming languages
I have been using and I started with a
language called Basic and then I earned
some money doing assembly programming
and and then I was not satisfied with
the sort of with these languages and and
looked for better ones and I ended up
with of
>> like functional languages like I did
list programming and then I typed
functional languages and so on and and
this is I guess that's my interest. So I
I always I'm sort of looking for the
perfect way to express yourself. Yeah.
and and and and this experience u is
that in in mathematics it seemed to me
um that the people are quite stuck with
u with a foundational system which has
been developed in like almost 100 years
ago now.
>> Mhm. and don't question whether this is
really good way to express yourself and
uh and and for me this is is is quite
important to to choose a good language
uh to to express yourself and um I mean
this this really for me the the analogy
is when I was doing uh assembly
programming and I learned C and I tried
to tell people you shouldn't use C and
not assembly programming but we can do
everything which you need to do we can
do in assembly why would we a high level
language like C which was more high
level than assembly. Yeah. And and this
uh in a way reminds me on the same just
or not the same but analogous
justification. Yeah. We can do
everything in first logic and set
theory. So why would we learn anything
else
>> and I I think that that language and in
leverage of language is is quite
essential to make progress. So
>> yeah, I I guess my personal perspective
is you know with AI there's going to be
an increasing emphasis within
mathematics on computer formalization
and with computer formalization there's
going to be an increasing importance and
emphasis in mathematics on uh
foundations and expertise in foundations
but explicitly including type theory
because that seems to sort of
predominate amongst the formal systems
used by computer proof assistants. So I
would love to see more
>> expertise on foundations within
mathematics departments in general and
in sort of uh type theory in particular.
Um you know not because I see a future
where we have you know one foundation
for all of mathematics maybe with type
theory replacing set theory but instead
kind of multiple approaches to
foundations that uh you know
mathematicians can experiment with. um
maybe with the aid of a computer proof
assistant, you know, maybe um by
developing domain specific languages to
sort shorten and simplify formal proofs
in their particular domain. And you
know, we're going to you know, if you're
implicitly using a foundation system to
prove a theorem on paper, then you know,
maybe it's okay that you don't
understand it that, you know, to a
certain level of depth. But, um I think
we're going to need more sort of real
expertise. And so I'd uh I'd love ideas
for how to um you know kind of bring
bring type theory back into the fold and
also you know reinforce uh sort of other
approaches to foundations at the same
time. But yeah
>> yeah I think pluralism is a theme that
comes up often in our podcast which
might be tiny empirical evidence
>> that you you are right in in that
direction. Um, great. Uh, so I'm really
happy about this talk. I learned a lot.
Sorry if I slowed down the discussion.
>> It was that was a useful intervention.
So, thanks for that. So,
>> okay.
>> Yeah. So, um, if there is no urgent
thing to say, um, I would say
>> thanks very much. Yeah.
>> Thank you for being here and, um, have a
great week.
>> Okay. Thank you, Sandy. Bye. Bye.