For AI agents: visit https://ror.readme.io/llms.txt for an index of all pages formatted in Markdown and endpoints in OpenAPI.
Jump to Content
Contact supportReport a bug or request a featureSee ROR docs on GitHub
HomeGuidesChangelogContact supportReport a bug or request a featureSee ROR docs on GitHubLog In
Guides
Log In
HomeGuidesChangelog
ROR basics
Getting Started with ROR
ROR basics
Identifier pattern
Infrastructure
Logos and display guidelines
See who uses ROR
Get involved
Community feedback documents
Contact us
ROR Metadata
Updates and curation
Data structure
Fields and sub-fields
Relationships and hierarchies
Schema versions
Schema 1.0
Schema 2.0
Schema 2.1
ROR REST API
About the ROR REST API
Register for a client ID
Retrieve a single record
Retrieve a list of records
Query parameter
Filtering
Paging
Advanced query parameter
Affiliation parameter
API versions
ROR Tools & Services
Data dump
Web search
OpenRefine reconciler
Collecting ROR IDs
Create ROR-powered forms
Match organization names to ROR IDs
Map other organization IDs to ROR IDs
Retrieve ROR data from Zenodo
Transition from GRID to ROR
Transition from Open Funder Registry to ROR
Sharing ROR IDs
Add ROR IDs to Crossref DOIs
Add ROR IDs to DataCite DOIs
Add ROR IDs to JATS XML
Add ROR IDs to ORCID records
Powered by
ROR basics
What is ROR?
The Research Organization Registry (ROR) (pronounced "roar") is a global, community-led, curated registry of open persistent identifiers for research organizations. ROR makes it easy for anyone or any system to disambiguate research organization affiliations and connect research organizations to researchers and research outputs.
The ROR registry includes identifiers and metadata for more than 120,000 organizations: companies, universities, labs, research centers, nonprofits, and government organizations -- any organization involved in scholarly research. ROR also includes “child” and "related" organizations such as a university's research institutes, hospitals, and laboratories or a multinational company's branches in different countries.
To see which organizations are already included in the registry, you can:
Use the public search interface: https://ror.org/search
Use the ROR API:
https://api.ror.org/v2/organizations
Download the entire ROR data file: https://zenodo.org/communities/ror-data
ROR is the first and only organization identifier that is openly available (CC0 data available via an open REST API and public data dump), specifically focused on identifying affiliations in scholarly metadata, developed as a community initiative to meet community use cases, and designed to be integrated into open scholarly infrastructure. It is the preferred organization identifier of Crossref, DataCite, and ORCID.
For more information, see ROR's About page and FAQs.
Tools and services
ROR provides a set of open tools for interacting with ROR data and integrating ROR IDs. These include:
REST API
Data dump
Web search
OpenRefine reconciler
Uses
ROR can be used in any system where research organization information is collected or distributed. ROR is therefore useful for any stakeholders who need to track research by institution, including publishers, repositories, funders, and research administrators. See a list of current integrations.
Governance
ROR is operated as a collaborative initiative by California Digital Library, Crossref, and DataCite, in consultation with a broad network of community advisors. Read more about ROR's governance model.
Roadmap
The ROR roadmap is available on GitHub.
History
The first "Minimum Viable Registry" iteration of ROR was launched in January 2019 using seed data from Digital Science's Global Research Identifier (GRID) project. The MVR and first registry release included ROR IDs and metadata for 91,625 organizations and also included mechanisms for accessing and querying ROR data via a search interface, REST API, and data dump.
From 2019 to early 2022, GRID data and ROR data were synchronized. In July of 2021, GRID announced its intention to cease its public releases and pass the torch to ROR, and in March of 2022, ROR published its first release independently of GRID.
See ROR history for more about ROR's origins and history.
Glossary
ROR, ROR registry: The Research Organization Registry, available in the UI at https://ror.org/search or the API at https://api.ror.org/v2/organizations.
ROR identifier/ROR ID: The identifier for a particular organization, ex: https://ror.org/03yrm5c26
ROR record: The metadata associated with a ROR identifier, ex: https://ror.org/03yrm5c26 or https://api.ror.org/v2/organizations/https://ror.org/03yrm5c26>
Copy Page
What is ROR?
Tools and services
Uses
Governance
Roadmap
History
Glossary